arXiv:2111.04824v3 [cs.LG] 1 May 2023
                                          MassFormer: Tandem Mass Spectrum
                                        Prediction for Small Molecules using Graph
                                                        Transformers
                                         Adamo Young1,4,5 , Hannes Röst1,2,4* and Bo Wang1,3,5,6*
                                          1 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto.
                                         2 Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto.
                                           3 Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,

                                                               University of Toronto.
                                               4 Terrence Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto.
                                                                  5 Vector Institute.
                                          6 Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, University Health Network.




                                        *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hannes.rost@utoronto.ca;
                                                         bowang@vectorinstitute.ai;
                                                Contributing authors: ayoung@cs.toronto.edu;


                                                                       Abstract
                                         Tandem mass spectra capture fragmentation patterns that provide key
                                         structural information about a molecule. Although mass spectrome-
                                         try is applied in many areas, the vast majority of small molecules
                                         lack experimental reference spectra. For over seventy years, spectrum
                                         prediction has remained a key challenge in the field. Existing deep
                                         learning methods do not leverage global structure in the molecule,
                                         potentially resulting in difficulties when generalizing to new data. In
                                         this work we propose a new model, MassFormer, for accurately pre-
                                         dicting tandem mass spectra. MassFormer uses a graph transformer
                                         architecture to model long-distance relationships between atoms in
                                         the molecule. The transformer module is initialized with parameters
                                         obtained through a chemical pre-training task, then fine-tuned on spec-
                                         tral data. MassFormer outperforms competing approaches for spectrum
                                         prediction on multiple datasets, and is able to recover prior knowl-
                                         edge about the effect of collision energy on the spectrum. By employing
                                         gradient-based attribution methods, we demonstrate that the model
                                         can identify relationships between fragment peaks. To further highlight


                                                                           1
2    MassFormer

     MassFormer’s utility, we show that it can match or exceed exist-
     ing prediction-based methods on two spectrum identification tasks.
     We provide open-source implementations of our model and baseline
     approaches, with the goal of encouraging future research in this area.

     Keywords: Mass Spectrometry, Metabolomics, Deep Learning, Chemistry,
     Transformers




1 Main
Mass spectrometry (MS, [1, 2]) is an analytical technique used for identifying
and quantifying chemicals in a mixture. Molecules from the sample are ion-
ized and then detected by a mass analyzer, which records information about
the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of each ion in the form of a mass spectrum.
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is a variant of MS that includes a frag-
mentation step to isolate and break down charged molecules (called precursors)
into smaller fragments. These ions appear as peaks in the fragment spectrum,
and their m/z position and relative abundance can be used to make inferences
about the molecular structure of the original precursor. When coupled with
online liquid chromatography (LC), a technique for chemical separation, the
combined LC-MS/MS workflow is a powerful tool for analyzing aqueous solu-
tions. Because of its versatility, LC-MS/MS is commonly employed in a variety
of domains, including proteomics [3], metabolomics [4, 5], forensics [6, 7], and
environmental chemistry [8].
    For most molecules, it is not possible to accurately simulate the fragmen-
tation that occurs in a mass spectrometer. In principle, theoretical physics
provides the tools to understand this process; however, existing first principles
simulations are too slow to be used in a high-throughput manner, and rely
on approximations that limit their accuracy (for further discussion, see Sup-
plementary Notes). This presents a fundamental problem for the field of mass
spectrometry, limiting our ability to analyze the data that is collected. Devel-
oping better spectrum simulators is critical for improving our understanding
of mass spectrometry and facilitating its more widespread application.
    Compound identification from MS/MS data is an important application
of mass spectrometry, particularly in metabolomics. Practitioners often rely
on database searches with large reference libraries, using spectrum similarity
functions [9] in combination with domain expertise to identify matches. How-
ever, these databases have relatively poor coverage, containing on the order of
106 spectra which represent approximately 104 unique compounds. This fails
to cover even the relatively small set of human metabolites, which is on the
order of 105 according to the human metabolome database (HMDB, [10]). One
strategy to overcome the scarcity of spectral libraries is to augment them with
simulated (in silico) mass spectra for a large number of compounds from a
chemical structure database [10–12]. This can dramatically increase coverage
                                                              MassFormer        3

for the reference library and improve the chance of finding a match, further
motivating the development of accurate spectrum prediction models.
    The increasing availability of public [10, 13–15] and commercial [16–19] MS
datasets makes data-driven solutions to spectrum prediction appealing. One
of the most popular spectrum prediction methods, competitive fragmentation
modelling (CFM, [20–22]), combines combinatorial framgentation and data-
driven probabilistic modelling to predict spectra. CFM has been shown to be
effective at predicting and annotating spectra, and can be used for compound
identification. However, due to its combinatorial bond-breaking algorithm,
CFM struggles with modelling larger compounds (particularly those with mul-
tiple rings). Deep learning has proven to be a useful tool for tackling complex
problems in a variety of domains [23–26]. Recently, two types of deep learning
methods have been proposed for spectrum prediction: fully-connected neu-
ral networks based on molecular fingerprints [27] and graph neural networks
that use a molecular graph representation [28, 29]. However, both of these
strategies rely on local chemical structures, and do not easily model global
interactions between far-away atoms in the molecule. Molecular fingerprints
are typically restricted to capturing subgraphs of a fixed size, and cannot repre-
sent global structures. Graph neural networks, while more flexible, only model
local interactions in a single layer and require increased depth for long-range
interactions [30]. However, excessive depth can often result in over-smoothing
[31, 32], presenting challenges for larger molecules. While each fragmentation
event appears to be a local phenomenon (involving a single bond breakage
or a local re-arrangement), the fragment ion intensity recorded by the instru-
ment corresponds to the relative propensity of such a fragmentation event to
occur compared to all other possible events. Therefore, a fragment ion inten-
sity cannot be interpreted on a local level without taking the global context
of the whole molecule into consideration. Concurrently to this work, a number
of deep learning spectrum predictors have been proposed [33–36]: these works
are discussed in the Supplementary Notes.
    In this work we adapt a state-of-the-art neural network architecture, the
graph transformer [37], to tackle MS/MS spectrum prediction. Graph trans-
formers model pairwise interactions between all nodes in the graph, and use
degree and shortest path information to capture topological properties. Our
experiments demonstrate how adapting a pre-trained graph transformer model
to spectrum prediction can result in state of the art performance. Through
rigorous comparisons with strong baseline methods, we demonstrate that our
model can more accurately predict spectra for held-out compounds on two
different spectrum datasets. We further validate the quality of our model’s
predictions by investigating the effects of collision energy on the simulated
spectra, and interpret MassFormer’s predictions with gradient-based attribu-
tion methods. Finally, we demonstrate a realistic use case by applying the
model to a spectrum identification problem.
4     MassFormer

2 Results
2.1 Overview
MassFormer uses a graph transformer architecture (Section 4.3) to predict
fragment spectra from an input molecule, represented as a molecular graph
(Section 4.2). A visual summary of our method is presented in Figure 1. The
input graph is first preprocessed into node and edge embeddings. The former
encode chemical information about the atoms, such as the element, and central-
ity properties like degree. The latter capture spatial relations between atoms
in the molecule, combining information about shortest path length and edges
visited along it. A full description of the featurization can be found in Section
4.2. After preprocessing, the embeddings are passed to a graph transformer,
which iteratively applies multi-head self-attention (MHA) and multi-layer per-
ceptrons (MLP) to manipulate the data. The learned self-attention weights
capture associations globally between all pairs of nodes, and are directly influ-
enced by edge embeddings at each iteration. After several rounds of processing,
the final embeddings are summarized into a single embedding that represents
the entire molecule. This chemical representation is combined with spectrum
metadata and passed to an MLP that makes a prediction in the form of a
sparse positive vector. Each dimension of the vector represents a binned peak
location, with the magnitude corresponding to the peak’s intensity. The meta-
data describe important information about the precursor (such as the adduct
formed during ionization) and the instrument (such as the collision energy),
both of which influence the fragmentation process and resulting spectrum [1].
The input embedding and graph transformer parameters are initialized from
a Graphormer model [37] that was pre-trained on a large chemical dataset
(see Section 4.4), then jointly tuned with the spectrum predictor MLP on the
MS/MS dataset.

2.2 Predicting Spectra for Unseen Compounds
To quantitatively evaluate our model’s predictions, we measured average cosine
similarity on different types of held-out spectrum data. MassFormer was com-
pared with two deep learning methods, a fingerprint (FP) neural network
model and a Weisfeiler-Lehman (WLN) graph neural network model, as well as
Competitive Fragmentation Modelling (CFM), a state of the art probabilistic
method for spectrum prediction that does not use deep neural networks (see
Section 4.8 for more details on the baselines). The three deep learning models
were trained on the same data: a 70% portion of the NIST 2020 Tandem Mass
Spectrometry dataset [17], with an additional 10% Validation set for hyperpa-
rameter tuning and early stopping. However, to benchmark CFM we simply
used the most recent publicly available pre-trained model [22], since re-training
CFM on our dataset would be non-trivial due to its design.1 These differences

  1
    CFM was designed to predict Q-TOF spectra for [M+H]+ precursors, while NIST contains
Orbitrap spectra for a variety of adduct types.
                                                                                   MassFormer                  5

                                                                          Node Features =
                                                                      Atom + Degree Embeddings
       Step 1:
    Preprocessing                                                             Edge Features =
                                                                          Shortest Path Embeddings

                          Molecular              Input
                           Graph               Embeddings                                      Pre-trained
                                                                                              Initialization




                                                                                  Readout
       Step 2:
  Graph Transformer                               MHA   MLP         MHA     MLP



                           Input                              Transformer                      Molecule
                         Embeddings                              Layers                       Embedding



       Step 3:               +
 Spectrum Prediction

                          Metadata
                         Embedding                MLP                                   Binned Spectrum



Figure 1 Overview of the method. Extraction of node and edge embeddings from the
molecular graph, application of the graph transformer, extraction of the chemical embed-
ding from the readout node, addition of spectral metadata (such as collision energy), and
prediction of the binned spectrum. The parameters for the input embeddings and the graph
transformer layers are initialized from a pre-trained model, and the entire model is fine-tuned
on the spectrum prediction task.


in training data introduced some ambiguity in comparisons between CFM and
other models.
    Model evaluation was performed on the NIST Test set (consisting of the
remaining 20% of spectra not used for training and validation), and an addi-
tional dataset from MassBank of North America (MoNA, [13]). We considered
two strategies for splitting the data: a simple random split by compound
(InChiKey) and a more challenging split (Scaffold) that stratifies compounds
by their Murcko scaffold [38, 39] before splitting. For more details on the
datasets and training splits, refer to Section 4.7. To allow for a fairer compari-
son with CFM, we focused on [M+H]+ spectra and removed compounds from
the test sets that were overlapping with CFM’s training set. In Extended Data
Figure 2, we demonstrate results for the deep learning models on the full range
of supported precursor adducts and confirm that they are consistent with the
results on the [M+H]+ subset.
    MassFormer reliably outperformed other models across different datasets
and split criteria (Figure 2). The performance of the three deep learning models
was correlated across data splits, reflecting the underlying differences in split
difficulty. NIST-InChIKey was the easiest, resulting in the best performance;
NIST-Scaffold exhibited split-induced distribution shift; MoNA-InChIKey con-
tained spectra from a different dataset; MoNA-Scaffold presented both of
6     MassFormer




        (a) Cosine Similarity: 0.91                   (b) Cosine Similarity: 0.99




                                           (c)
Figure 2 Spectrum similarity experiments. MassFormer can accurately predict spec-
tra for Furanylfentanyl (2a, an opiod analgesic) and Liparin A (2b, a natural product),
two examples from the NIST-Scaffold Test set. 2c compares the average cosine similarity
of four models ( CFM = Competitive Fragmentation Modellin, FP = Fingerprint, WLN =
Weisfeiler-Lehman Network, MF = MassFormer) on four different data splits. The number
of molecules in the training set is provided for each split. To allow for direct comparison
with CFM, we limited training and evaluation spectra to [M+ H]+ precursor adducts. Mass-
Former was consistently the best-performing deep learning model. All models struggled more
on MoNA than NIST, and Scaffold splitting was more challenging than InChIKey. Aver-
ages and standard deviations from 10 independently trained models are reported (except
for CFM, which was pre-trained). Statistical significance determined by one-sided Welch’s
t-test with Šidák correction.

the aforementioned challenges. Ground truth spectra for compounds that
existed in both NIST and MoNA tended to be highly similar2 , suggesting that
batch effect had limited impact. Thus, the decrease in performance on MoNA
splits was most likely due to differences in compound and metadata coverage.

 2
   When comparing ostensibly identical spectra from NIST and MoNA (same compound and
metadata), on average they scored approximately 0.97 cosine similarity.
                                                                MassFormer        7

Altogether, the experiments demonstrate that model performance strongly
depended on data splitting technique, and that MassFormer was consistently
superior across all splits.
    We also performed a more granular investigation of MassFormer’s per-
formance by comparing average similarity across the top ten most frequent
chemical classes in our dataset (Extended Data Figure 1), as indicated by
ClassyFire [40], an automatic chemical ontology tool. While most classes had
similar performance, the model seemed to perform exceptionally well on “lipids
and lipid-like molecules”. This is perhaps unsurprising, as some types of lipids
have predictable fragmentation patterns, facilitating the success of rule-based
fragmenters in lipid spectrum predition [21, 41]. Conversely, simulating spec-
tra for lipid-like compounds can be challenging for many generalist methods
due to their large size [22], so MassFormer’s success in this area is encouraging.

2.3 Modelling the Effect of Collision Energy
Collision energy is a key experimental parameter that can strongly influ-
ence the observed spectrum. Typically, increasing the collision energy results
in more intense fragmentation, producing spectra with a higher proportion
of smaller fragments. We wanted to investigate whether MassFormer could
accurately model this effect. The relationship between collision energy and
fragmentation is well represented in the NIST dataset, since each molecule
was measured at ≈ 11 different collision energies on average (see Table 4).
Figure 3a illustrates how collision energy typically affects fragmentation. The
four spectra (and associated spectrum predictions) all correspond to the same
molecule at varying normalized collision energies (NCEs), an expression of col-
lision energy relative to precursor mass (see Equation 6). As collision energy
increases, the peak intensities in the real mass spectra shift to the left, with the
model’s predictions closely following this pattern. Figure 3c shows this rela-
tionship more generally, by plotting the distribution of mean peak m/z in the
spectrum, where each peak is weighted by its relative intensity. Qualitatively,
the real and predicted distributions for the held-out spectra were difficult to
distinguish.

2.4 Explaining Peak Predictions with Gradient-Based
    Attribution
While neural networks are often viewed as black boxes, gradient-based attri-
bution methods can provide some understanding of model behaviour. Broadly
speaking, these methods work by taking the gradient of the model’s output
with respect to the input features to identify parts of the data that the model
is most sensitive to. Gradient × Input (GI) attribution [42, 43] is one of the
simplest methods for gradient-based attribution, and can be useful analyzing
transformer models [44]. GI works by measuring the dot product between the
8      MassFormer




                                                (a)




                  (b)                                               (c)
Figure 3 Collision energy experiments. 3a demonstrates how increasing collision
energy influences a compound’s mass spectrum. Four spectra corresponding to ben-
zhydrylpiperazine (3b, a piperazine derivative) at different normalized collision energies
(NCEs) were selected from the NIST Test set. Notice how the mass distribution shifts to
smaller fragments as NCE increases. MassFormer is able to predict the spectrum well at each
of the four collision energies, and correctly models the shift in intensity. 3c is a pair of density
maps comparing the relationship between average mass-to-charge ratio and collision energy
for real and predicted spectra from the NIST Test set. In addition to confirming the general
negative correlation between collision energy and peak location, these plots demonstrate
that MassFormer accurately models this property on held-out data.


input vector and its gradient: this can give information about the effects (pos-
itive or negative) of changing that feature on the model’s output. For more
details on GI computation refer to Section 4.6.
    Each peak in a mass spectrum corresponds to a fragment of the origi-
nal precursor. In organic compounds, non-Oxygen heteroatoms are much less
common than the core Carbon/Hydrogen/Oxygen building blocks, so frag-
ments that contain such heteroatoms are in some sense unique and related. We
hypothesized that the model might be able to identify which peaks correspond
to heteroatom-containing fragments. If this were true, one might expect the
input dependencies for these peaks to be related: more concretely, the GI maps
for such peaks would be correlated. A positive result would demonstrate that
that, in some sense, the model understands which fragments are represented
by each peak, and that such information can be revealed with gradient-based
attribution methods.
                                                                      MassFormer           9




                                            (a)




                     (b)                                            (c)
Figure 4 Explainability using Gradient Attributions. GI attribution maps for each
peak in Propanolol spectrum (4a) were computed and then projected to two dimensions with
PCA (4b). The peaks were annotated with mass formulae using the SIRIUS toolkit, to allow
assignment of binary labels based on heteroatom presence (in this example, Nitrogen). The
projected GI maps for peaks that contained Nitrogen (in green) were linearly separable from
those that did not (in purple), suggesting that these maps contained interpretable infor-
mation about the peaks. The GI maps were normalized, with red values corresponding to
positive attributions and blue values corresponding to negative attributions. 4c shows that
this trend holds across the entire dataset. The distribution of optimal linear classification
accuracy induced by the Nitrogen labelling strategy was markedly different from the ran-
dom labelling distribution (higher accuracy indicates improved separability of the peaks).
Furthermore, 35% of the peaks were perfectly linearly separable when using the Nitrogen
labelling, compared to only 7% with the random baseline approach (p < 10−48 by one-sided
Welch’s t-test).
10      MassFormer

    For each peak, we computed a GI map using the gradient of the model’s
output at the peak location with respect to the input molecule’s atom embed-
dings. These GI maps were high dimensional, so we projected them using
principal component analysis (PCA) down to two dimensions for interpreta-
tion. Then, we applied the SIRIUS formula annotation tool [45] to identify
which peaks contained a heteroatom of interest. If a spectrum’s GI map pro-
jections were linearly separable based on heteroatom labelling, this would be
strong evidence that the GI maps capture heteroatom information about their
corresponding peaks. Thus, we fitted a logistic regression model in the 2D pro-
jection space using the heteroatom peak labels, and reported its accuracy as
a measurement of peak separability. The entire process is illustrated in Figure
4. The GI maps for a particular spectrum (Figure 4a) were computed, pro-
jected, and plotted in two dimensions (Figure 4b). In this example, it is clear
that the Nitrogen and non-Nitrogen peaks are perfectly linearly separable.
By repeating this analysis for many spectra from the dataset (Figure 4c), we
showed that the Nitrogen labelling in the projected GI map space resulted in
markedly higher linear separability than random labelling. In Extended Data
Figure 6 we show that this pattern holds for four other heteroatoms (Cl,P,S,F).
Altogether these data suggest that MassFormer can learn implicit heteroatom-
based relationships between predicted peaks in the spectrum, and that these
relationships can be revealed using gradient-based attribution methods.

2.5 Identifying Spectra by Ranking Candidates
Spectrum identification is a major application that motivates the develop-
ment of spectrum prediction models. MS compound identification tools (see
Supplementary Notes for examples) are typically benchmarked on the Criti-
cal Assessment of Small Molecule Identification (CASMI) competition [46, 47].
The basic setup of the CASMI task is as follows: experimental spectra are
acquired for a small set of compounds (called queries) that are not repre-
sented in existing public libraries, and competing methods are scored based on
their ability to identify the correct structure. We performed a variation of the
CASMI competition using MassFormer and the three comparison models from
Section 2.2: FP, WLN, and CFM. In this variation, we used positive mode
[M+H]+ spectra from the CASMI 2016 competition (1243 unique queries in
total). We trained each of the three deep learning models on the same data (the
NIST-InChIKey Train set, see Section 2.2), with additional filtering to prevent
data leakage of CASMI query compounds. As in the previous section, we used
a pre-trained version of CFM, similar to what the authors did in the origi-
nal CASMI 2016 competition [47] as well as their most recent paper [22]. All
models used the original candidate structure list provided by the contest orga-
nizers, which was constructed by searching ChemSpider [48] for compounds
with masses similar to the precursor (see original paper [47] for more details).

  3
    There were 127 positive mode spectra in CASMI 2016, but we removed 3 compounds with
charged atoms to maintain compatibility with our training setup, which assumes neutral molecules.
This also allows for fairer comparison with CFM, which does not natively support charged atoms.
                                                                    MassFormer              11

Candidate rankings for each model were established based on the similarity
of predicted candidate spectra with the query. The results are summarized
in Tables 1 and 2 (additional plots of the rank distributions can be found in
Extended Data Figure 3). Overall, the deep learning models seemed to con-
sistently outperform CFM in all metrics. MassFormer was generally superior
to other methods, except for CASMI Top-1 (where it was outperformed by
the Fingerprint model). While it would be possible to improve scores of all
methods with a more refined candidate structure selection [22, 45], we stuck
with a simple approach to demonstrate a worst-case scenario where there is
little a priori information about the query compound other than its mass and
precursor adduct.

                           CASMI                                  pCASMI
   Model     Rank (⇓)      Top-1 (⇑)    Top-5 (⇑)    Rank (⇓)     Top-1 (⇑)    Top-5 (⇑)
   CFM         46.0            .25         .44         391.5          .07         .23
    FP      42.2 ± 5.4     .34 ± .03    .60 ± .02   135.9 ± 9.5   .19 ± .02     .44 ± .02
   WLN      47.0 ± 11.8    .24 ± .04    .56 ± .02    91.8 ± 8.5    .16 ± .01    .41 ± .02
    MF      27.1 ± 5.3     .29 ± .02   .61 ± .03    85.4 ± 5.8     .18 ± .02   .47 ± .01
Table 1 Spectrum Identification Ranking Metrics. Ranking metrics for the CASMI
and pCASMI spectrum identification tasks. Rank corresponds to the average rank of the
correct candidate. Top-k accuracy reports the frequency with which the correct candidate
is in set of the k highest ranked candidates. MassFormer (MF) performed best across all
metrics except Top-1, where it was outperformed by the fingerprint model (FP) in both
CASMI and pCASMI. Averages and standard deviations from 10 independently trained
models are reported, except for CFM (which was pre-trained).




                           CASMI                                  pCASMI
  Model    N-Rank (⇓)     Top-1% (⇑)   Top-5% (⇑)   N-Rank (⇓)    Top-1% (⇑)   Top-5% (⇑)
   CFM        .091           .54          .68          .198          .26          .44
    FP     .050 ± .005    .65 ± .03     .81 ± .02   .097 ± .006   .45 ± 0.02    .66 ± .02
   WLN     .055 ± .006     .58 ± .03   .79 ± 0.02   .073 ± .003   .47 ± 0.02    .70 ± .03
   MF      .036 ± .005     .63 ± .03   .84 ± 0.02   .065 ± .004   .52 ± 0.02   .74 ± .02
Table 2 Spectrum Identification Normalized Ranking Metrics. The normalized
counterparts of the ranking metrics displayed in Table 1 for the CASMI and pCASMI
spectrum identification tasks. Normalizing by the number of candidates reduces sensitivity
to query spectra with large candidate sets. MassFormer (MF) seemed to perform best
across all metrics, except for CASMI Top-1 where the fingerprint model (FP) was slightly
better. Averages and standard deviations from 10 independently trained models are
reported, except for CFM (which was pre-trained).



    CASMI is a useful way of evaluating spectrum identification methods, but
it has a number of limitations. Because of the small number of query spectra
(124 compounds) and limited coverage of precursor adducts (only [M+H]+ for
positive mode) and collision energies (20,35,50 NCE), it is difficult to draw
12     MassFormer

conclusions about the performance of models with more diverse spectrum con-
figurations. Additionally, many of the compounds in the CASMI 2016 set
have high similarity with existing compounds in modern spectral libraries.
To address these concerns, we proposed a new spectrum identification task
called pseudo-CASMI (pCASMI). Full details about the setup of this challenge
can be found in Section 4.9. Briefly, we selected outlier compounds from the
NIST dataset to create the query list. The results of this challenge are also
included in Tables 1 and 2. Overall, pCASMI was a more challenging task,
with lower scores for all methods when compared with CASMI. MassFormer
performed strongly in all metrics. Interestingly, the WLN model seemed to
have problems with average rank in the CASMI competition, but was signifi-
cantly better in pCASMI. Unsurprisingly, CFM performed worse in pCASMI
than CASMI, likely because the query spectra represent a more diverse set of
collision energies for which CFM was neither designed nor optimized.
    Altogether, these experiments demonstrate how gains in spectrum pre-
diction will often, but not always, translate to improvements in spectrum
identification. MassFormer was the superior spectrum predictor, and this was
reflected in its strong ranking metrics. However, the Fingerprint model per-
formed surprisingly well in Top-k, sometimes eclipsing other methods (like
MassFormer and WLN) which were far better at predicting spectra. Spec-
trum identification requires making predictions for a large number of candidate
structures, many of which are out-of-distribution with respect to the training
set. Performance on an independent and identically distributed (IID) held-out
test set does not fully describe a model’s behaviour on out-of-distribution data,
which is generally more difficult to estimate. In fact, optimized models which
perform similarly on an in-distribution validation set often perform differently
on out-of-distribution data [49–51].

3 Discussion
In this work we introduced MassFormer, a novel method for predicting MS/MS
spectra for small molecules using a graph transformer architecture. We val-
idated our model’s performance with two independent MS datasets, NIST
and MoNA, and showed that it can produce realistic spectra. We verified
that the model captures prior knowledge about the fragmentation process by
investigating the effect of collision energy on the predicted spectrum. Using
gradient-based attributions, we demonstrated model explainability by show-
ing it can identify peaks with similar element composition. We benchmarked
the model with two different molecule ranking task and showed that it can be
useful for MS/MS spectrum identification. Our work represents one of the first
open-source deep learning spectrum predictors for MS/MS data, with extensive
benchmarking and implementations of other models from the literature.
    Our method has a number of limitations. The current model is restricted to
positive mode ESI Orbitrap spectra with specific precursor adducts. Extend-
ing the model to accommodate additional ionization modes (such as EI and
                                                             MassFormer        13

negative mode ESI), adduct types, and instrument types (such as Q-TOF)
would broaden MassFormer’s impact. By supporting additional mass spectrum
modalities, the model would be able to leverage new sources of MS data. Pre-
diction resolution is another limitation: all experiments in this work use spectra
binned to 1 Da, but many MS/MS spectra have much higher resolution (in
NIST, up to 0.0001 Da for Orbitrap spectra). This additional resolution can
help distinguish between fragments with similar masses, and is particularly use-
ful for larger molecules. Finally, while our model is explainable to some degree
(through gradient-based attribution), it does not provide true fragment peak
annotations like some other methods [22, 45]. Structural and formula fragment
annotations are often useful for practitioners: they can improve confidence in
the model’s predictions by allowing experienced users to manually validate
predicted peak patterns against prior knowledge about fragmentation mecha-
nisms. Additionally, when predicting spectra for identification purposes, peak
annotations can be helpful for inferring the identity of the correct compound
(or compound class), even when the overall prediction contains considerable
noise. Developing a deep learning model that is capable of producing these
annotations would be a valuable contribution to the field.
    MassFormer has a number of exciting applications, largely focused on
MS-based compound identification. We have already demonstrated how Mass-
Former can be used to identify a spectrum given a list of candidate structures.
SIRIUS [45] is a popular tool for identification that does not rely on spectrum
prediction. It may be possible to combine MassFormer with SIRIUS (or another
existing tool) to improve structure identifications. For example, SIRIUS uses
information in the query spectrum to predict chemical features (such as pre-
cursor formulae and fingerprints) that help with identification. These features
could be used refine a set of candidate compounds that would subsequently
be ranked by predicted spectrum similarity with the query. Alternatively, for-
going a candidate database entirely, MassFormer could instead be combined
with a generative model for small molecules to help search the chemical space
for high-scoring spectrum matches, as seen in other works [52, 53]. Finally,
MassFormer has potential for use in decoy generation [54, 55], which plays
an important role in false discovery rate (FDR) calibration for untargeted
metabolomics experiments. Target-decoy methods work by introducing a num-
ber of pseudo-random data points (realistic but synthetic spectra) that are
ground truth negatives, allowing for empirical estimation and tuning of confi-
dence thresholds to meet an FDR criterion. Applying MassFormer to predict
noisy spectra for compounds that are unlikely to exist already in the sample
(such as pesticide molecules in human blood) is a potentially powerful strat-
egy for generating realistic decoys, which would improve FDR estimates and
reduce the chance of incorrect compound identifications.
14     MassFormer

4 Methods
4.1 Problem Formulation
Spectrum prediction can be viewed as a supervised learning problem, with
a dataset {xi , z i , y i }ni=1 where xi is a molecule and y i is its spectrum under
experimental conditions z i . The goal is to learn the parameters θ of the pre-
diction function fθ : X × Z → Y, where X is the space of chemicals and Y is
the spectrum space. Mass spectra can be represented as a set of peaks, each
of which have an m/z location and an intensity. By discretizing the peak loca-
tions into m fixed-width bins (as was done in [27, 28]), a mass spectrum can
be represented as an m-dimensional sparse vector, where each peak at loca-
tion j has intensity yj ≥ 0. The problem of spectrum prediction can thus be
formulated as vector regression, with Y = Rm  0. The spectral metadata
z ∈ Z (such as collision energy and precursor adduct) are provided as side
information to the input molecule x.

4.2 Chemical Featurization
The featurization of an input molecule x is critical, as it influences the struc-
ture of the prediction function fθ and can have an impact on downstream
performance. Molecular fingerprints (also called molecular descriptors) repre-
sent molecules using hand-designed chemical features. Common feature choices
include presence of predefined substructures (MACCS, [56]) and hashed local
substructure counts (ECFP, [57]). Molecular graph representations capture the
structure of a molecule by explicitly representing atoms as nodes and bonds
as edges. The node features can encode various chemical properties associated
with the atom (i.e. element, formal charge, number of bonded hydrogens),
while the edge features can encode bond information (i.e. bond type, aromatic-
ity). Such representations naturally lend themselves to graph neural networks
and graph transformers (see Section 4.3 below), and can be more expressive
than fingerprints. Our graph representations do not include any stereochem-
ical, conformer, or 3D coordinate information since such information is not
provided in our MS datasets.
    The node, edge, and spectrum metadata features used for MassFormer are
summarized in Table 3. Note that the node and edge features were chosen
to be identical to the pre-trained Graphormer model (see Section 4.4), to
preserve compatibility. However, some of these features used in this model
(formal charge, radical state, stereochemical information) were not applicable
to our data, and have been omitted.

4.3 Chemical Graph Transformer
Transformers [58] are a family of neural networks characterized by their use of
attention to model sequences. Originally developed for neural machine trans-
lation [59], transformer models have proven useful in a number of domains,
from computer vision [60] to reinforcement learning [61], achieving state of
                                                                   MassFormer        15

      Feature Type           Feature Name                       Values
          Node                  Element                    C,N,O,P,S,F,Cl
          Node                  Degree                      0, . . . , 10, 11+
          Node           Number of Hydrogens                0, . . . , 8, 9+
                                                            SP,SP2,SP3,
          Node           Orbital Hybridization
                                                         SP3D,SP3D2,Other
          Node                Aromaticity                     True,False
          Node             Ring Membership                   True,False
                                                        Single,Double,Triple,
          Edge                Bond Type
                                                          Aromatic,Other
          Edge             Bond Conjugation                   True,False
        Metadata      Normalized Collision Energy             (0, 200]
                                                       [M+H]+ , [M+H-H2 O]+ ,
        Metadata           Precursor Adduct          [M+H-2 H2 O]+ , [M+2 H]2+ ,
                                                       [M+H-NH3 ]+ , [M+Na]+
        Metadata          Precursor Mass (Da)                  (0, 1000]

Table 3 Featurization. Input features provided to the MassFormer model. Node
features capture atom information, edge features capture bond information, and metadata
features capture information specific to the spectrum.



the art performance even in problems that do not naturally lend themselves
to sequence modelling. They represent an input sequence as a set of embed-
dings, each of which capture the meaning and position of a single element. By
interleaving layers of multi-head attention (MHA) with small multi-layer per-
ceptrons (MLPs), transformers iteratively process the set of embeddings and
learn relationships between elements.
    A number of graph transformers have been proposed [37, 62–65], motivated
by the ability to model pairwise global interactions between all nodes in the
graph. Many graph neural networks (i.e. graph attention network [66]) are
similar in structure to graph transformers but can only model local relations
in a single layer, and require large depth to model interactions over longer
distances [30]. Graph transformers are useful when the input graph is small
enough such that the quadratic memory footprint of the attention mechanism
does not become prohibitively expensive. They have achieved state-of-the-art
performance in both 2D (graph) and 3D molecule property prediction tasks
[37, 67].
    Our approach adapts the Graphormer [37] architecture, a recent graph
transformer model that boasts impressive results on chemical property pre-
diction tasks [37, 68], particularly in the low-data regime (on the order of
104 samples). The distinguishing characteristic of this graph transformer is its
unique positional encoding scheme. The model uses shortest path information
between nodes, and associated edge embeddings along that path, as a form of
relative positional encoding. The shortest path information is computed as a
preprocessing step for each graph, using the Floyd-Warshall algorithm [69].
16     MassFormer

    The attention mechanism aij is described in detail in Equations 1 and
                        0
2, where hi , hj ∈ Rd ×1 are representations for nodes i and j respectively.
                   0
WK , WQ ∈ Rd×d are the standard learnable key and query projection matri-
ces. bij ∈ R is a learnable scalar indexed by the shortest path distance between
i and j (which is always a positive integer). cij ∈ R is the edge embedding
term, described by Equation 2. Allowing a slight abuse of notation, ep ∈ Rd×1
is the embedding corresponding to the pth edge in the shortest path between
i and j, and wp ∈ Rd×1 is a learnable weight for that position.


                                    (WQ hi )T (WK hj )
                                                                    
                aij = softmax              √           + bij + cij          (1)
                                              d
                        1 X T
                cij =      w ep                                             (2)
                        N p p

    For graph-level prediction tasks, it is useful to add a readout node to the
input graph that can extract graph-level embeddings, similar to the CLS token
in NLP transformers [70]. This “fake” node is initialized with a unique embed-
ding and connected to all other nodes in the graph with a special edge type.
In the final layer of the transformer, the readout node’s embedding is inter-
preted as a summarized representation of the input graph and can be used for
downstream property prediction.

4.4 Pre-training and Fine-tuning
Adapting a pre-trained model can offer improved performance over training
a radomly initialized model from scratch, particularly when data scarcity is
a concern. We initialized the parameters of our graph transformer module
and the learned input node and edge embeddings (see Figure 1) with the
corresponding parameters of a pre-trained Graphormer model. This model
was originally trained on the PCQM4Mv2 dataset [67, 71], a large dataset of
approximately 4 million 2D molecular graphs and their Density Functional
Theory (DFT) simulated HOMO-LUMO energy gap. The pre-training task
was a supervised graph-level regression problem of predicting the energy gap.
While this task is not directly related to mass spectrometry, the roughly
100-fold larger compound coverage of the PCQM4Mv2 dataset provided an
opportunity for the model to learn general chemical representations that trans-
fer to the spectrometry task. In Extended Data Table 1, we performed model
ablations to determine relative contributions of different aspects of the fine-
tuning process. Our experiments demonstrate that using pre-trained weights
is necessary to scale up the number of model parameters while maintaining
training stability and performance. We also found re-initializing the statistics
of the layer normalization [72] modules to be helpful. The other key compo-
nent of MassFormer, the spectrum prediction MLP, was initialized randomly.
Both modules were fine-tuned jointly for 20 epochs using a linearly decaying
                                                                      MassFormer           17

learning rate. For full details on the training procedure, please refer to the
code repository (Section 6).

4.5 Loss and Similarity Calculations
Since MS peak intensities are relative 4 , it is advisable to use loss functions that
are invariant to scaling. We choose cosine distance (Eq. 3) as the loss function,
where ŷ = fθ (x, z) is the predicted spectrum and y is the real spectrum. Cosine
similarity is commonly used to compare spectra, so minimizing the cosine
distance (thus maximizing similarity) is a natural choice and has been shown
to work well in other models [27, 28].

                                                      Pm
                                     y T ŷ                  yi ŷi
                 CD(y, ŷ) = 1 −              = 1 − qP i=1 P                              (3)
                                     y 2 ŷ 2         m    2     m     2
                                                      j=1 yj     k=1 ŷk


    The spectral similarity experiments (Figure 2, Extended Data Figures 1
and 2, Extended Data Table 1) report average cosine similarity using a partic-
ular method of aggregating the results across spectra. Since there were often
multiple spectra with different collision energies corresponding to the same pre-
cursor, both target and predicted spectra were averaged (in binned spectrum
space) across collision energy before computing similarity. This helped prevent
inflated similarity scores resulting from spectra with very few peaks, which
tends to happen when the collision energy is either too high or too low. These
similarity scores were subsequently averaged per molecule (i.e. across precursor
adducts), then averaged again across molecules. This effectively down-weighted
the individual importance of spectra corresponding to molecules with multiple
precursor adducts in the dataset.

4.6 Gradient-based Feature Attribution
Gradient × Input (GI, [42, 43]) is an attribution method that assigns impor-
tance scores to input variables based on the sensitivity of the model’s
predictions to changes in those variables, estimated using gradients. It satis-
fies the conservation axiom, an underlying assumption for many explainable
AI approaches which posits that “scores assigned to input variables and form-
ing the explanation must sum to the output of the network” [44]. If a model is
sensitive to changes in certain parts of the input, these features are taken to
be more important for making a correct prediction. GI methods compute the
attribution score as the the dot product of the gradient vector with the input.
Inputs with scores close to 0 are unimportant, while those with large posi-
tive or negative scores are interpreted as contributing positively or negatively
(respectively) to the prediction.

  4
    The unnormalized value of a peak intensity can provide useful information in some contexts
(such as quantification and noise removal), but reference spectra have already been normalized
and denoised.
18     MassFormer

    More formally, let x ∈ RD be an input vector with D dimensions, let
y ∈ RK be an output value associated with x, and fθ (x) : RD → RK be a
neural network. Let L(y, ŷ) : RK × RK → R be a scalar loss function (for
example, cosine distance). The GI score for the model on this input vector is
defined precisely by Equation 4:


                          GI(x, y) = x · ∇x L(y, fθ (x))                      (4)

    While GI score calculation is generally applicable to any type of fully
differentiable neural network, there are certain aspects of the transformer archi-
tecture (the self-attention mechanism [58] and layer normalization module
[72]) that violate the conservation axiom and, in practice, reduce the quality
of model explanations [44]. To address this problem, we made slight modifi-
cations to these modules when calculating GI scores, as recommended in [44]
(refer to their paper for full details).
    In our experiments, the neural network fθ in Equation 4 was MassFormer,
which maps input molecules to K-dimensional binned spectrum vectors (where
K = 1000). To compute the GI scores for a peak at particular location k,
we used a loss function that zeros out all other peaks in the spectrum. More
precisely, we defined the loss Lk for peak k using Equation 5:


                               Lk (x) = ek · fθ (x)                           (5)

    In the above formulation, ek is the k th standard basis vector for RK (in
other words, a one-hot vector where the k th entry is 1).
    Note that MassFormer takes a molecular graph as input, which is sub-
sequently preprocessed into different types of embeddings (see Figure 1 and
Section 4.2). We computed attribution scores only with respect to the element
embeddings, as our experiments in Section 2.4 involved discriminating peaks
by element composition. To visualize the GI attribution maps (i.e. Figure 4b),
we estimated GI scores for each atom and then L2 normalized across atoms, to
remove information about gradient magnitude and focus only on direction. We
employed a slight variation of the aforementioned GI computation (Equation
4) for the linear projections in Section 2.4: instead of summing over the embed-
ding dimension to produce a single scalar score per atom, we performed PCA
on the unreduced GI map. Summing over the dimensions is useful for produc-
ing an easily interpretable score, but might remove variation that could inform
the PCA projection.

4.7 Datasets and Training Splits
We used the NIST 2020 MS/MS dataset [17] for both training and evaluation.
NIST is a commercial dataset notable for its large coverage (over 1 million
tandem spectra in total), standardized spectrum acquisition protocol, and high
                                                                MassFormer          19

degree of manual validation. We also used the publicly available MassBank of
North America (MoNA) as a held-out evaluation set. Massbank is an important
dataset for the MS community, as it is one of the largest open online repository
of MS data for small molecules. This dataset contained spectra from a variety
of other online repositories, including GNPS [14], HMDB [10], and ReSpect
[15]. For simplicity, we only considered spectra from Orbitrap instruments that
use HCD collision [1], as this corresponds to the largest subset of data in NIST.
Furthermore, we restricted the dataset to only include positive mode spectra
with 6 of the most highly occurring precursor adducts ([M+H]+ , [M+H-H2 O]+ ,
[M+H-2 H2 O]+ , [M+2 H]2+ , [M+H-NH3 ]+ , [M+Na]+ ). The dataset statistics
are summarized in Table 4. After filtering, NIST is a much larger dataset than
MoNA, both in terms of number of spectra and compounds. For this reason,
we relied on NIST data to train the models and used MoNA exclusively for
evaluation.

        Dataset    # Spectra    # Compounds      Average # NCE / Compound
         NIST       375,406         22,105                   11.33
         MoNA        13,225         1,376                    9.29

Table 4 Summary statistics for each MS dataset, after filtering for positive mode
Orbitrap spectra and desired precursor adducts ([M+H]+ , [M+H-H2 O]+ , [M+H-2 H2 O]+ ,
[M+2 H]2+ , [M+H-NH3 ]+ , [M+Na]+ ).



    Two kinds of data splitting techniques were employed in Section 2.2. Both
methods involved splitting spectra based on compound identity, to avoid leak-
age of spectra that differ only in metadata (such as collision energy or precursor
type) but not in structure. The “InChIKey” split used non-sterochemical
InChIKey strings [73], which are hashed chemical string representations, as
molecular identifiers. This approach was, in essence, a simple random split
based on compound identity. In contrast, the “Scaffold” split used Murcko
Scaffolds [38] to coarsely cluster compounds before splitting in a manner such
that all the compounds (and associated spectra) from one cluster would end up
in the same partition. Scaffold splitting introduces distributional shift between
training and test data, and is commonly used to evaluate deep learning models
in small molecule applications [74].

4.8 Baseline Models
We compare our method with two related deep learning models, based on exist-
ing approaches from the literature. The Fingerprint model combines ECFP,
MACCS, and RDKit fingerprints (all of which are available from the RDKit
library [39]) and uses those directly as the chemical embedding. The WLN
model uses a molecular graph representation in combination with a Weisfeiler-
Lehman Network ([75]), which is a particular kind of graph neural network, to
produce the chemical embedding. These models are based on two previously
20      MassFormer

published MS prediction models: [27] and [28] respectively. However, both
models required reimplementation for direct comparison: the former [27] was
trained on a different type of MS data (EI-MS), while the latter [28] did not
have available public code. 5 Compared to MassFormer’s 56 million param-
eters, the WLN model had approximately 6 million parameters and the FP
model had approximately 35 million parameters.

              Dataset            InChIKey Overlap/Total        Scaffold Overlap/Total
                NIST                    2,728/22,114                1,372/6,893
               MoNA                      499/1,372                    362/649
         CASMI (Queries)                   48/124                      58/92
       CASMI (Candidates)               139/197,465                  580/71,477
         pCASMI (Queries)                  32/300                      37/300
       pCASMI (Candidates)              114/650,225                 820/192,980

Table 5 Structure overlap of the CFM training set (4054 molecules, 1576 scaffolds) with
other datasets used in the experiments. Overlap reported in terms of identical InChIKeys
(ignoring stereochemical information) and identical Scaffolds.



    In addition, we compare our model to Competitive Fragmentation Mod-
elling (CFM, [20, 22]), a well-known tool for small molecule spectrum predic-
tion. CFM is not a deep learning approach: it uses combinatorial fragmentation
to determine the set of possible peak locations, then fits a probabilistic model
to predict the relative intensity of the fragments. CFM was designed to predict
Q-TOF spectra at 3 specific collision energies (10,20,40) and with a limited
set of precursor adducts (for positive mode, only [M+H]+ ). It is not straight-
forward to re-train CFM on the NIST dataset, which contains roughly 10x
more spectra than CFM’s original training set, from a different kind of instru-
ment (Orbitrap) and covering a wider range of precursor adducts and collision
energies. CFM makes assumptions about fragmentation that are specific to
the types of spectra that it models, complicating application to new datasets.
Additionally, scaling CFM’s training procedure to such a large dataset would
be challenging. For these reasons, we used the most recent pre-trained version
of the model [22] for all experiments. This version was trained on a 4054-
molecule subset of the Metlin dataset [18]: see Table 5 for information about
the overlap of CFM’s training set with the other datasets. In our experiments
with CFM, we mapped the input normalized collision energy to whichever of
the three CFM-supported absolute collision energies was closest. To convert
from normalized to absolute collision energy, we used Equation 6, where m(p)
is the precursor mass and c(p) is the charge factor, which is 1.0 for singly
charged precursors and 0.9 for doubly charged precursors.

  5
    We communicated with the authors of [28] and designed our WLN model to be similar to their
best configuration.
                                                            MassFormer        21



                                  m(p) × c(p) × NCE
                         ACE =                                               (6)
                                         500

   CFM also contains a rule-based module for lipid spectrum prediction [21].
We preferentially employed this module to make predictions instead of the
combinatorial/probabilistic approach, wherever applicable.

4.9 Spectrum Identification Task Setup
CASMI 2016 contains Orbitrap spectra for 188 unique compounds, 127 of
which are positive mode ([M+H]+ adducts). Each spectrum was merged over
three normalized collision energies: 20, 35, and 50. Additionally, each query had
an associated candidate list, which was originally developed by searching the
ChemSpider database [48] for compounds with similar masses to the precursor.
After preprocessing, there were on average 1250 candidate compounds per
spectrum.
    To construct the pCASMI dataset, we selected compounds from the NIST
dataset with unique Murcko Scaffolds. We sampled 400 of such compounds
in total, stratified by molecular weight: 75 with weight < 200 Da, 75 with
weight in [200, 300) Da, 75 with weight in [300, 400) Da, and 75 with weight
≥ 400 Da. The motivation was to select a diverse group of outlier compounds
to use as queries in the identification task. For each compound, all [M+H]+
spectra (of any collision energy) were used as query information. The candi-
date sets were established by sampling compounds from PubChem (up to 10k)
with molecular mass within 0.5 ppm of the true query mass. We filtered the
candidate list to remove rare elements and multi-molecular compounds. Stere-
ochemical information was also removed, and stereoisomeric candidates were
deduplicated. After preprocessing, there were on average 2201 candidates per
spectrum, which is roughly double that of the CASMI challenge.
    The models were scored using an array of different unnormalized (Table
1) and normalized (3, Table 2) ranking metrics, inspired by those typically
employed in CASMI competitions [47]. Average Rank (Table 1) corresponds
to the average rank of the true candidate compound, with 1 being the best
score. Its normalized counterpart, Average Normalized Rank (Table 2) corre-
sponds to the average rank of the true candidate expressed as a fraction of
the total number of candidates, with 0 being the best score and 1 being the
worst. Top-k Accuracy (Table 1) represents the frequency with which the true
candidate is ranked in the top k candidates, and ranges from 0 to 1. Top-k%
Accuracy (Table 2) is the normalized equivalent, measuring how often the cor-
rect candidate appeared in the top k% of candidates. In contrast to the average
rank metrics, Top-k and Top-k% metrics do not strongly penalize ranking the
correct candidate extremely poorly (any rank outside of the top k or k% is
equally bad). Orthogonally, the normalized metrics are less sensitive to differ-
ences caused by variation in the number of candidates per query, which can
be useful.
22    MassFormer

4.10 Implementation Details
All models were implemented in PyTorch [76]. Our model, MassFormer, used
a modified version of the Graphormer v2 implementation [37]. The WLN
model used the Deep Graph Library [77, 78] package for geometric deep learn-
ing. We also adapted some code from [28] for spectrum preprocessing. Before
benchmarking the FP and WLN baseline models, we ran a bayesian hyperpa-
rameter sweep using Weights & Biases [79], with budget of 100 initializations,
to find the best-performing configuration on the NIST validation set. The
list of hyperparameters that we optimized is as follows: learning rate, weight
decay, dropout, minibatch size, and network-architecture specific parameters
(such as hidden dimension and number of layers). For MassFormer we stuck
with the Graphormer “Large” architecture, which had available pre-trained
weights. For full model details and hyperparameter configurations, please see
the code repository (linked in Section 6).

5 Data Availability
We used the NIST 2020 LC-ESI-MS/MS library, which is commercial and
can be purchased from NIST or licensed distributors. In our code reposi-
tory (see Section 6), we include instructions for exporting the NIST data
and preprocessing it to work with our models. We also used data hosted on
MoNA (the “LC-MS/MS Spectra” partition, https://mona.fiehnlab.ucdavis.
edu/downloads) and data from the CASMI 2016 Competition (the “Chal-
lenge Data” section, http://casmi-contest.org/2016/challenges-cat2+3.shtml).
Exact versions of these data are available on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.7874421), and can be preprocessed following instructions in our code
repository.

6 Code Availability
The code for data preprocessing, model implementations, and experiment con-
figurations is open-source (BSD-2-Clause license) and can be found in this
GitHub repository: https://github.com/Roestlab/massformer/.
                                                           MassFormer        23

References
 [1] Gross, J.H.: Mass Spectrometry. Springer, Cham (2017). https://
     doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-54398-7. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
     978-3-319-54398-7 Accessed 2022-11-02

 [2] Niessen, W.M.A., Falck, D.: Introduction to Mass Spectrometry, a
     Tutorial. In: Analyzing Biomolecular Interactions by Mass Spec-
     trometry, pp. 1–54. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, ??? (2015). https:
     //doi.org/10.1002/9783527673391.ch1. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
     doi/abs/10.1002/9783527673391.ch1 Accessed 2021-10-01

 [3] Aebersold, R., Mann, M.: Mass-spectrometric exploration of proteome
     structure and function. Nature 537(7620), 347–355 (2016)

 [4] Gowda, G.A.N., Djukovic, D.: Overview of Mass Spectrometry-Based
     Metabolomics: Opportunities and Challenges. Methods in molecular
     biology (Clifton, N.J.) 1198, 3–12 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/
     978-1-4939-1258-2 1. Accessed 2021-11-04

 [5] De Vijlder, T., Valkenborg, D., Lemière, F., Romijn, E.P., Laukens, K.,
     Cuyckens, F.: A tutorial in small molecule identification via electrospray
     ionization-mass spectrometry: The practical art of structural elucidation.
     Mass Spectrometry Reviews 37(5), 607–629 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
     1002/mas.21551. Accessed 2021-11-05

 [6] Peters, F.T.: Recent advances of liquid chromatography–(tandem) mass
     spectrometry in clinical and forensic toxicology. Clinical Biochemistry
     44(1), 54–65 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2010.08.008.
     Accessed 2023-01-05

 [7] Van Bocxlaer, J.F., Clauwaert, K.M., Lambert, W.E., Deforce, D.L.,
     Van den Eeckhout, E.G., De Leenheer, A.P.: Liquid chromatography-
     mass spectrometry in forensic toxicology. Mass Spectrometry Reviews
     19(4), 165–214 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1002/1098-2787(200007)19:
     4h165::AID-MAS1i3.0.CO;2-Y

 [8] Lebedev, A.T.: Environmental Mass Spectrometry. Annual Review of
     Analytical Chemistry 6(1), 163–189 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1146/
     annurev-anchem-062012-092604. Accessed 2021-11-05

 [9] Stein, S.E., Scott, D.R.: Optimization and testing of mass spectral library
     search algorithms for compound identification. Journal of the American
     Society for Mass Spectrometry 5(9), 859–866 (1994). https://doi.org/10.
     1016/1044-0305(94)87009-8. Accessed 2021-11-05

[10] Wishart, D.S., Feunang, Y.D., Marcu, A., Guo, A.C., Liang, K.,
24    MassFormer

     Vázquez-Fresno, R., Sajed, T., Johnson, D., Li, C., Karu, N., Sayeeda,
     Z., Lo, E., Assempour, N., Berjanskii, M., Singhal, S., Arndt, D., Liang,
     Y., Badran, H., Grant, J., Serra-Cayuela, A., Liu, Y., Mandal, R., Neveu,
     V., Pon, A., Knox, C., Wilson, M., Manach, C., Scalbert, A.: HMDB
     4.0: the human metabolome database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Research
     46(D1), 608–617 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1089

[11] Kim, S., Chen, J., Cheng, T., Gindulyte, A., He, J., He, S., Li, Q.,
     Shoemaker, B.A., Thiessen, P.A., Yu, B., Zaslavsky, L., Zhang, J.,
     Bolton, E.E.: PubChem 2019 update: improved access to chemical data.
     Nucleic Acids Research 47(Database issue), 1102–1109 (2019). https:
     //doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1033. Accessed 2021-04-16

[12] Kanehisa, M., Furumichi, M., Sato, Y., Ishiguro-Watanabe, M., Tanabe,
     M.: KEGG: integrating viruses and cellular organisms. Nucleic Acids
     Research 49(D1), 545–551 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa970

[13] Horai, H., Arita, M., Kanaya, S., Nihei, Y., Ikeda, T., Suwa, K., Ojima,
     Y., Tanaka, K., Tanaka, S., Aoshima, K., Oda, Y., Kakazu, Y., Kusano,
     M., Tohge, T., Matsuda, F., Sawada, Y., Hirai, M.Y., Nakanishi, H.,
     Ikeda, K., Akimoto, N., Maoka, T., Takahashi, H., Ara, T., Sakurai, N.,
     Suzuki, H., Shibata, D., Neumann, S., Iida, T., Tanaka, K., Funatsu, K.,
     Matsuura, F., Soga, T., Taguchi, R., Saito, K., Nishioka, T.: MassBank: a
     public repository for sharing mass spectral data for life sciences. Journal
     of Mass Spectrometry 45(7), 703–714 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1002/
     jms.1777. Accessed 2020-10-27

[14] Wang, M., Carver, J.J., Phelan, V.V., Sanchez, L.M., Garg, N., Peng, Y.,
     Nguyen, D.D., Watrous, J., Kapono, C.A., Luzzatto-Knaan, T., Porto,
     C., Bouslimani, A., Melnik, A.V., Meehan, M.J., Liu, W.T., Crüsemann,
     M., Boudreau, P.D., Esquenazi, E., Sandoval-Calderón, M., Kersten,
     R.D., Pace, L.A., Quinn, R.A., Duncan, K.R., Hsu, C.C., Floros, D.J.,
     Gavilan, R.G., Kleigrewe, K., Northen, T., Dutton, R.J., Parrot, D.,
     Carlson, E.E., Aigle, B., Michelsen, C.F., Jelsbak, L., Sohlenkamp, C.,
     Pevzner, P., Edlund, A., McLean, J., Piel, J., Murphy, B.T., Gerwick,
     L., Liaw, C.C., Yang, Y.L., Humpf, H.U., Maansson, M., Keyzers, R.A.,
     Sims, A.C., Johnson, A.R., Sidebottom, A.M., Sedio, B.E., Klitgaard,
     A., Larson, C.B., P, C.A.B., Torres-Mendoza, D., Gonzalez, D.J., Silva,
     D.B., Marques, L.M., Demarque, D.P., Pociute, E., O’Neill, E.C., Briand,
     E., Helfrich, E.J.N., Granatosky, E.A., Glukhov, E., Ryffel, F., Hou-
     son, H., Mohimani, H., Kharbush, J.J., Zeng, Y., Vorholt, J.A., Kurita,
     K.L., Charusanti, P., McPhail, K.L., Nielsen, K.F., Vuong, L., Elfeki, M.,
     Traxler, M.F., Engene, N., Koyama, N., Vining, O.B., Baric, R., Silva,
     R.R., Mascuch, S.J., Tomasi, S., Jenkins, S., Macherla, V., Hoffman, T.,
     Agarwal, V., Williams, P.G., Dai, J., Neupane, R., Gurr, J., Rodrı́guez,
     A.M.C., Lamsa, A., Zhang, C., Dorrestein, K., Duggan, B.M., Almaliti,
                                                        MassFormer       25

    J., Allard, P.M., Phapale, P., Nothias, L.F., Alexandrov, T., Litaudon,
    M., Wolfender, J.L., Kyle, J.E., Metz, T.O., Peryea, T., Nguyen, D.T.,
    VanLeer, D., Shinn, P., Jadhav, A., Müller, R., Waters, K.M., Shi, W.,
    Liu, X., Zhang, L., Knight, R., Jensen, P.R., Palsson, B.O., Pogliano,
    K., Linington, R.G., Gutiérrez, M., Lopes, N.P., Gerwick, W.H., Moore,
    B.S., Dorrestein, P.C., Bandeira, N.: Sharing and community curation of
    mass spectrometry data with Global Natural Products Social Molecular
    Networking. Nat Biotechnol 34(8), 828–837 (2016)

[15] Sawada, Y., Nakabayashi, R., Yamada, Y., Suzuki, M., Sato, M., Sakata,
     A., Akiyama, K., Sakurai, T., Matsuda, F., Aoki, T., Hirai, M.Y.,
     Saito, K.: RIKEN tandem mass spectral database (ReSpect) for phyto-
     chemicals: A plant-specific MS/MS-based data resource and database.
     Phytochemistry 82, 38–45 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phytochem.
     2012.07.007. Accessed 2023-03-09

[16] Stein, S.: Mass Spectral Reference Libraries: An Ever-Expanding
     Resource for Chemical Identification. Analytical Chemistry 84(17),
     7274–7282 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1021/ac301205z. Accessed 2021-
     10-01

[17] Yang, X., Neta, P., Stein, S.E.: Quality Control for Building Libraries
     from Electrospray Ionization Tandem Mass Spectra. Analytical Chem-
     istry 86(13), 6393–6400 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1021/ac500711m.
     Accessed 2021-07-05

[18] Guijas, C., Montenegro-Burke, J.R., Domingo-Almenara, X., Palermo,
     A., Warth, B., Hermann, G., Koellensperger, G., Huan, T., Uritboon-
     thai, W., Aisporna, A.E., Wolan, D.W., Spilker, M.E., Benton, H.P.,
     Siuzdak, G.: METLIN: A Technology Platform for Identifying Knowns
     and Unknowns. Analytical Chemistry 90(5), 3156–3164 (2018). https:
     //doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04424. Accessed 2020-11-25

[19] Wiley, J., Sons: Wiley Registry of Mass Spectral Data, 12th Edition
     (2020)

[20] Allen, F., Greiner, R., Wishart, D.: Competitive fragmentation
     modeling of ESI-MS/MS spectra for putative metabolite identifica-
     tion. Metabolomics 11(1), 98–110 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/
     s11306-014-0676-4. Accessed 2020-10-13

[21] Djoumbou-Feunang, Y., Pon, A., Karu, N., Zheng, J., Li, C., Arndt,
     D., Gautam, M., Allen, F., Wishart, D.S.: CFM-ID 3.0: Signifi-
     cantly Improved ESI-MS/MS Prediction and Compound Identification.
     Metabolites 9(4), 72 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo9040072.
     Accessed 2021-12-29
26   MassFormer

[22] Wang, F., Liigand, J., Tian, S., Arndt, D., Greiner, R., Wishart, D.S.:
     CFM-ID 4.0: More Accurate ESI-MS/MS Spectral Prediction and Com-
     pound Identification. Analytical Chemistry (2021). https://doi.org/10.
     1021/acs.analchem.1c01465. Accessed 2021-08-23

[23] Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez,
     A., Lanctot, M., Sifre, L., Kumaran, D., Graepel, T., Lillicrap, T.,
     Simonyan, K., Hassabis, D.: Mastering Chess and Shogi by Self-Play with
     a General Reinforcement Learning Algorithm. arXiv. arXiv:1712.01815
     [cs] (2017). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1712.01815. http://arxiv.
     org/abs/1712.01815 Accessed 2023-01-25

[24] Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ron-
     neberger, O., Tunyasuvunakool, K., Bates, R., Žı́dek, A., Potapenko,
     A., Bridgland, A., Meyer, C., Kohl, S.A.A., Ballard, A.J., Cowie, A.,
     Romera-Paredes, B., Nikolov, S., Jain, R., Adler, J., Back, T., Petersen,
     S., Reiman, D., Clancy, E., Zielinski, M., Steinegger, M., Pacholska,
     M., Berghammer, T., Bodenstein, S., Silver, D., Vinyals, O., Senior,
     A.W., Kavukcuoglu, K., Kohli, P., Hassabis, D.: Highly accurate protein
     structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 596(7873), 583–589 (2021).
     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2. Number: 7873 Publisher:
     Nature Publishing Group. Accessed 2023-01-25

[25] Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.:
     High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models.
     arXiv. arXiv:2112.10752 [cs] (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
     2112.10752. http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752 Accessed 2023-01-25

[26] Brown, T.B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhari-
     wal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal,
     S., Herbert-Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh,
     A., Ziegler, D.M., Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler,
     E., Litwin, M., Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCan-
     dlish, S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., Amodei, D.: Language Models are
     Few-Shot Learners. arXiv. arXiv:2005.14165 [cs] (2020). https://doi.org/
     10.48550/arXiv.2005.14165. http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165 Accessed
     2023-01-25

[27] Wei, J.N., Belanger, D., Adams, R.P., Sculley, D.: Rapid prediction of
     electron–ionization mass spectrometry using neural networks. ACS Cen-
     tral Science 5(4), 700–708 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.
     9b00085. Accessed 2021-03-03

[28] Zhu, H., Liu, L., Hassoun, S.: Using Graph Neural Networks for Mass
     Spectrometry Prediction. arXiv:2010.04661 [cs] (2020). Accessed 2021-
     02-20
                                                          MassFormer       27

[29] Li, X., Zhu, H., Liu, L.-p., Hassoun, S.: Ensemble Spectral Prediction
     (ESP) Model for Metabolite Annotation. arXiv:2203.13783 [cs, q-bio]
     (2022). arXiv: 2203.13783. Accessed 2022-04-28

[30] Xu, K., Hu, W., Leskovec, J., Jegelka, S.: How Powerful are Graph
     Neural Networks? arXiv:1810.00826 [cs, stat] (2019). arXiv: 1810.00826.
     Accessed 2020-05-11

[31] Chen, D., Lin, Y., Li, W., Li, P., Zhou, J., Sun, X.: Measuring and
     Relieving the Over-smoothing Problem for Graph Neural Networks from
     the Topological View. arXiv. arXiv:1909.03211 [cs, stat] (2019). http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/1909.03211 Accessed 2023-03-08

[32] Liu, M., Gao, H., Ji, S.: Towards Deeper Graph Neural Networks.
     In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
     on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 338–348 (2020). https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403076. arXiv:2007.09296 [cs, stat]. http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2007.09296 Accessed 2023-03-08

[33] Murphy, M., Jegelka, S., Fraenkel, E., Kind, T., Healey, D., Butler, T.:
     Efficiently predicting high resolution mass spectra with graph neural
     networks. arXiv. arXiv:2301.11419 [cs, q-bio] (2023). http://arxiv.org/
     abs/2301.11419 Accessed 2023-03-02

[34] Goldman, S., Bradshaw, J., Xin, J., Coley, C.W.: Prefix-tree Decoding
     for Predicting Mass Spectra from Molecules. arXiv. arXiv:2303.06470 [cs,
     q-bio] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.06470. http://arxiv.
     org/abs/2303.06470 Accessed 2023-03-17

[35] Hong, Y., Li, S., Welch, C.J., Tichy, S., Ye, Y., Tang, H.: 3DMolMS:
     Prediction of Tandem Mass Spectra from Three Dimensional Molec-
     ular Conformations. bioRxiv. Pages: 2023.03.15.532823 Section: New
     Results (2023). https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.15.532823. https://
     www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.15.532823v1 Accessed 2023-
     03-17

[36] Zhu, R.L., Jonas, E.: Rapid Approximate Subset-Based Spectra Pre-
     diction for Electron Ionization–Mass Spectrometry. Analytical Chem-
     istry 95(5), 2653–2663 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.
     2c02093. Publisher: American Chemical Society. Accessed 2023-03-23

[37] Ying, C., Cai, T., Luo, S., Zheng, S., Ke, G., He, D., Shen, Y., Liu, T.-
     Y.: Do transformers really perform bad for graph representation? Neural
     Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2021)

[38] Bemis, G.W., Murcko, M.A.: The Properties of Known Drugs. 1. Molec-
     ular Frameworks. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 39(15), 2887–2893
28   MassFormer

     (1996). https://doi.org/10.1021/jm9602928. Accessed 2021-11-04

[39] Landrum, G.: RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics. http://www.rdkit.
     org

[40] Djoumbou Feunang, Y., Eisner, R., Knox, C., Chepelev, L., Hastings, J.,
     Owen, G., Fahy, E., Steinbeck, C., Subramanian, S., Bolton, E., Greiner,
     R., Wishart, D.S.: ClassyFire: automated chemical classification with a
     comprehensive, computable taxonomy. Journal of Cheminformatics 8(1),
     61 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-016-0174-y. Accessed 2023-
     01-05

[41] Kind, T., Liu, K.-H., Lee, D.Y., DeFelice, B., Meissen, J.K., Fiehn, O.:
     LipidBlast in silico tandem mass spectrometry database for lipid identifi-
     cation. Nature Methods 10(8), 755–758 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1038/
     nmeth.2551. Number: 8 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Accessed
     2023-03-07

[42] Shrikumar, A., Greenside, P., Kundaje, A.: Learning Important Features
     Through Propagating Activation Differences. arXiv. arXiv:1704.02685
     [cs] (2019). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1704.02685. http://arxiv.
     org/abs/1704.02685 Accessed 2023-02-13

[43] Ancona, M., Ceolini, E., Öztireli, C., Gross, M.: Towards better
     understanding of gradient-based attribution methods for Deep Neural
     Networks. arXiv. arXiv:1711.06104 [cs, stat] (2018). https://doi.org/
     10.48550/arXiv.1711.06104. http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06104 Accessed
     2023-02-13

[44] Ali, A., Schnake, T., Eberle, O., Montavon, G., Müller, K.-R., Wolf, L.:
     XAI for Transformers: Better Explanations through Conservative Prop-
     agation. arXiv. arXiv:2202.07304 [cs] (2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.
     07304 Accessed 2023-01-19

[45] Dührkop, K., Fleischauer, M., Ludwig, M., Aksenov, A.A., Melnik, A.V.,
     Meusel, M., Dorrestein, P.C., Rousu, J., Böcker, S.: SIRIUS 4: a rapid
     tool for turning tandem mass spectra into metabolite structure informa-
     tion. Nature Methods 16(4), 299–302 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/
     s41592-019-0344-8. Accessed 2020-10-29

[46] Schymanski, E.L., Neumann, S.: CASMI: And the Winner is . . . Metabo-
     lites 3(2), 412–439 (2013). https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo3020412.
     Number: 2 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
     Accessed 2022-01-12

[47] Schymanski, E.L., Ruttkies, C., Krauss, M., Brouard, C., Kind, T.,
     Dührkop, K., Allen, F., Vaniya, A., Verdegem, D., Böcker, S., Rousu,
                                                          MassFormer        29

    J., Shen, H., Tsugawa, H., Sajed, T., Fiehn, O., Ghesquière, B., Neu-
    mann, S.: Critical Assessment of Small Molecule Identification 2016:
    automated methods. Journal of Cheminformatics 9(1), 22 (2017). https:
    //doi.org/10.1186/s13321-017-0207-1. Accessed 2021-09-27

[48] Pence, H.E., Williams, A.: ChemSpider: An Online Chemical Infor-
     mation Resource. Journal of Chemical Education 87(11), 1123–1124
     (2010). https://doi.org/10.1021/ed100697w. Publisher: American Chem-
     ical Society. Accessed 2023-03-06

[49] McCoy, R.T., Min, J., Linzen, T.: BERTs of a feather do not gener-
     alize together: Large variability in generalization across models with
     similar test set performance. arXiv. arXiv:1911.02969 [cs] (2020). https:
     //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1911.02969. http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.02969
     Accessed 2023-01-16

[50] Zhou, X., Nie, Y., Tan, H., Bansal, M.: The Curse of Performance
     Instability in Analysis Datasets: Consequences, Source, and Suggestions.
     arXiv. arXiv:2004.13606 [cs] (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
     2004.13606. http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.13606 Accessed 2023-01-16

[51] D’Amour, A., Heller, K., Moldovan, D., Adlam, B., Alipanahi, B., Beu-
     tel, A., Chen, C., Deaton, J., Eisenstein, J., Hoffman, M.D., Hormozdiari,
     F., Houlsby, N., Hou, S., Jerfel, G., Karthikesalingam, A., Lucic, M., Ma,
     Y., McLean, C., Mincu, D., Mitani, A., Montanari, A., Nado, Z., Natara-
     jan, V., Nielson, C., Osborne, T.F., Raman, R., Ramasamy, K., Sayres,
     R., Schrouff, J., Seneviratne, M., Sequeira, S., Suresh, H., Veitch, V.,
     Vladymyrov, M., Wang, X., Webster, K., Yadlowsky, S., Yun, T., Zhai,
     X., Sculley, D.: Underspecification Presents Challenges for Credibility
     in Modern Machine Learning. arXiv. arXiv:2011.03395 [cs, stat] (2020).
     https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2011.03395. http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.
     03395 Accessed 2023-01-16

[52] Stravs, M.A., Dührkop, K., Böcker, S., Zamboni, N.: MSNovelist: de
     novo structure generation from mass spectra. Nature Methods 19(7),
     865–870 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01486-3. Number:
     7 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Accessed 2022-12-21

[53] Shrivastava, A.D., Swainston, N., Samanta, S., Roberts, I., Wright Mue-
     las, M., Kell, D.B.: MassGenie: A Transformer-Based Deep Learn-
     ing Method for Identifying Small Molecules from Their Mass
     Spectra. Biomolecules 11(12), 1793 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/
     biom11121793. Accessed 2021-12-29

[54] Hoffmann, M.A., Nothias, L.-F., Ludwig, M., Fleischauer, M., Gentry,
     E.C., Witting, M., Dorrestein, P.C., Dührkop, K., Böcker, S.: High-
     confidence structural annotation of metabolites absent from spectral
30   MassFormer

     libraries. Nature Biotechnology, 1–11 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/
     s41587-021-01045-9. Bandiera abtest: a Cc license type: cc by Cg type:
     Nature Research Journals Primary atype: Research Publisher: Nature
     Publishing Group Subject term: Data processing;Molecular biology Sub-
     ject term id: data-processing;molecular-biology. Accessed 2021-11-26

[55] Scheubert, K., Hufsky, F., Petras, D., Wang, M., Nothias, L.-F.,
     Dührkop, K., Bandeira, N., Dorrestein, P.C., Böcker, S.: Significance
     estimation for large scale metabolomics annotations by spectral match-
     ing. Nature Communications 8(1), 1494 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/
     s41467-017-01318-5. Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
     Accessed 2022-12-21

[56] Durant, J.L., Leland, B.A., Henry, D.R., Nourse, J.G.: Reoptimization of
     MDL keys for use in drug discovery. Journal of Chemical Information and
     Computer Sciences 42(6), 1273–1280 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1021/
     ci010132r

[57] Rogers, D., Hahn, M.: Extended-Connectivity Fingerprints. Journal of
     Chemical Information and Modeling 50(5), 742–754 (2010). https://doi.
     org/10.1021/ci100050t. Accessed 2021-05-18

[58] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L.,
     Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention Is All You Need.
     arXiv:1706.03762 [cs] (2017). Accessed 2021-10-27

[59] Tan, Z., Wang, S., Yang, Z., Chen, G., Huang, X., Sun, M., Liu, Y.:
     Neural machine translation: A review of methods, resources, and tools.
     AI Open 1, 5–21 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiopen.2020.11.001.
     Accessed 2021-11-04

[60] Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X.,
     Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S.,
     Uszkoreit, J., Houlsby, N.: An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Trans-
     formers for Image Recognition at Scale. arXiv:2010.11929 [cs] (2021).
     Accessed 2021-11-04

[61] Janner, M., Li, Q., Levine, S.: Reinforcement Learning as One Big
     Sequence Modeling Problem. arXiv:2106.02039 [cs] (2021). Accessed
     2021-11-04

[62] Khasahmadi, A.H., Hassani, K., Moradi, P., Lee, L., Morris, Q.: Memory-
     Based Graph Networks. arXiv:2002.09518 [cs, stat] (2020). Accessed
     2021-06-16

[63] Mialon, G., Chen, D., Selosse, M., Mairal, J.: GraphiT: Encoding Graph
                                                           MassFormer        31

    Structure in Transformers. arXiv:2106.05667 [cs] (2021). Accessed 2021-
    06-16

[64] Maziarka, L., Danel, T., Mucha, S., Rataj, K., Tabor, J., Jastrzȩbski, S.:
     Molecule Attention Transformer. arXiv:2002.08264 [physics, stat] (2020).
     Accessed 2021-02-22

[65] Rong, Y., Bian, Y., Xu, T., Xie, W., Wei, Y., Huang, W., Huang,
     J.: Self-Supervised Graph Transformer on Large-Scale Molecular Data.
     arXiv:2007.02835 [cs, q-bio] (2020). Accessed 2021-11-04

[66] Veličković, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Liò, P., Bengio,
     Y.: Graph Attention Networks. arXiv:1710.10903 [cs, stat] (2018). arXiv:
     1710.10903. Accessed 2021-04-16

[67] Hu, W., Fey, M., Ren, H., Nakata, M., Dong, Y., Leskovec, J.: OGB-
     LSC: A Large-Scale Challenge for Machine Learning on Graphs. arXiv.
     arXiv:2103.09430 [cs] (2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.09430 Accessed
     2023-01-05

[68] Hu, W., Fey, M., Zitnik, M., Dong, Y., Ren, H., Liu, B., Catasta, M.,
     Leskovec, J.: Open Graph Benchmark: Datasets for Machine Learning
     on Graphs. arXiv:2005.00687 [cs, stat] (2021). Accessed 2021-11-04

[69] Floyd, R.W.: Algorithm 97: Shortest path. Communications of the ACM
     5(6), 345 (1962). https://doi.org/10.1145/367766.368168. Accessed
     2021-11-05

[70] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: BERT: Pre-
     training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understand-
     ing. arXiv:1810.04805 [cs] (2019). Accessed 2021-11-04

[71] Nakata, M., Shimazaki, T.: PubChemQC Project: A Large-Scale First-
     Principles Electronic Structure Database for Data-Driven Chemistry.
     Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 57(6), 1300–1308 (2017).
     https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00083. Accessed 2021-11-04

[72] Ba, J.L., Kiros, J.R., Hinton, G.E.: Layer Normalization. arXiv.
     arXiv:1607.06450 [cs, stat] (2016). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1607.
     06450. http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450 Accessed 2023-02-13

[73] Heller, S.R., McNaught, A., Pletnev, I., Stein, S., Tchekhovskoi, D.:
     InChI, the IUPAC International Chemical Identifier. Journal of Chem-
     informatics 7(1), 23 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-015-0068-4.
     Accessed 2023-02-13

[74] Wu, Z., Ramsundar, B., Feinberg, E.N., Gomes, J., Geniesse, C., Pappu,
32   MassFormer

     A.S., Leswing, K., Pande, V.: MoleculeNet: a benchmark for molecular
     machine learning. Chemical Science 9(2), 513–530 (2018). https://doi.
     org/10.1039/C7SC02664A. Publisher: The Royal Society of Chemistry.
     Accessed 2023-02-13

[75] Jin, W., Coley, C.W., Barzilay, R., Jaakkola, T.: Predicting Organic
     Reaction Outcomes with Weisfeiler-Lehman Network. arXiv:1709.04555
     [cs, stat] (2017). Accessed 2021-09-30

[76] Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G.,
     Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., Köpf, A.,
     Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner,
     B., Fang, L., Bai, J., Chintala, S.: PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-
     Performance Deep Learning Library. arXiv:1912.01703 [cs, stat] (2019).
     Accessed 2021-11-04

[77] Wang, M., Zheng, D., Ye, Z., Gan, Q., Li, M., Song, X., Zhou, J., Ma,
     C., Yu, L., Gai, Y., Xiao, T., He, T., Karypis, G., Li, J., Zhang, Z.:
     Deep Graph Library: A Graph-Centric, Highly-Performant Package for
     Graph Neural Networks. arXiv:1909.01315 [cs, stat] (2020). Accessed
     2021-05-18

[78] Li, M., Zhou, J., Hu, J., Fan, W., Zhang, Y., Gu, Y., Karypis, G.: DGL-
     LifeSci: An Open-Source Toolkit for Deep Learning on Graphs in Life
     Science. arXiv:2106.14232 [cs, q-bio] (2021). Accessed 2021-09-30

[79] Biewald, L.: Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. Software
     available from wandb.com (2020). https://www.wandb.com/

[80] Rosenstock, H.M., Wallenstein, M.B., Wahrhaftig, A.L., Eyring, H.:
     Absolute Rate Theory for Isolated Systems and the Mass Spectra
     of Polyatomic Molecules*. Proceedings of the National Academy of
     Sciences 38(8), 667–678 (1952). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.38.8.667.
     Publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Accessed
     2023-01-15

[81] Rosenstock, H.M., Krauss, M.: CURRENT STATUS OF THE
     STATISTICAL THEORY OF MASS SPECTRA. In: Elliott, R.M.
     (ed.) Advances in Mass Spectrometry, pp. 251–284. Pergamon, ???
     (1963). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-009775-6.50029-3. https:
     //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080097756500293
     Accessed 2023-01-15

[82] Lorquet,    J.C.:    Whither    the   statistical theory   of    mass
     spectra?     Mass      Spectrometry     Reviews    13(3),     233–257
     (1994).        https://doi.org/10.1002/mas.1280130304.         eprint:
     https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/mas.1280130304.
                                                        MassFormer       33

    Accessed 2023-01-15

[83] Lorquet, J.C.: Landmarks in the theory of mass spectra. International
     Journal of Mass Spectrometry 200(1), 43–56 (2000). https://doi.org/10.
     1016/S1387-3806(00)00303-1. Accessed 2023-01-15

[84] Murphy, R.C.: Tandem Mass Spectrometry of Lipids, (2014).
     https://books-rsc-org.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/books/monograph/
     1091/Tandem-Mass-Spectrometry-of-Lipids Accessed 2023-01-31

[85] Steen, H., Mann, M.: The abc’s (and xyz’s) of peptide sequencing.
     Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 5(9), 699–711 (2004). https:
     //doi.org/10.1038/nrm1468. Number: 9 Publisher: Nature Publishing
     Group. Accessed 2023-01-05

[86] Gessulat, S., Schmidt, T., Zolg, D.P., Samaras, P., Schnatbaum, K.,
     Zerweck, J., Knaute, T., Rechenberger, J., Delanghe, B., Huhmer, A.,
     Reimer, U., Ehrlich, H.-C., Aiche, S., Kuster, B., Wilhelm, M.: Prosit:
     proteome-wide prediction of peptide tandem mass spectra by deep learn-
     ing. Nature Methods 16(6), 509–518 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/
     s41592-019-0426-7. Number: 6 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
     Accessed 2023-01-05

[87] Tiwary, S., Levy, R., Gutenbrunner, P., Salinas Soto, F., Palaniap-
     pan, K.K., Deming, L., Berndl, M., Brant, A., Cimermancic, P., Cox,
     J.: High-quality MS/MS spectrum prediction for data-dependent and
     data-independent acquisition data analysis. Nature Methods 16(6),
     519–525 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0427-6. Number: 6
     Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Accessed 2023-01-05

[88] MassFrontier. https://www.thermofisher.com/ca/en/home/industrial/
     mass-spectrometry/liquid-chromatography-mass-spectrometry-lc-ms/
     lc-ms-software/multi-omics-data-analysis/
     mass-frontier-spectral-interpretation-software.html

[89] MS           Fragmenter.         https://www.acdlabs.com/products/
     spectrus-platform/ms-fragmenter/

[90] Wolf, S., Schmidt, S., Müller-Hannemann, M., Neumann, S.: In silico
     fragmentation for computer assisted identification of metabolite mass
     spectra. BMC Bioinformatics 11(1), 148 (2010). https://doi.org/10.
     1186/1471-2105-11-148. Accessed 2021-10-27

[91] Ruttkies, C., Schymanski, E.L., Wolf, S., Hollender, J., Neumann, S.:
     MetFrag relaunched: incorporating strategies beyond in silico fragmen-
     tation. Journal of Cheminformatics 8(1), 3 (2016). https://doi.org/10.
     1186/s13321-016-0115-9. Accessed 2021-10-27
34   MassFormer

[92] Tsugawa, H., Kind, T., Nakabayashi, R., Yukihira, D., Tanaka, W.,
     Cajka, T., Saito, K., Fiehn, O., Arita, M.: Hydrogen Rearrangement
     Rules: Computational MS/MS Fragmentation and Structure Elucidation
     Using MS-FINDER Software. Analytical Chemistry 88(16), 7946–7958
     (2016). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.6b00770. Accessed 2023-
     01-31

[93] Lai, Z., Tsugawa, H., Wohlgemuth, G., Mehta, S., Mueller, M., Zheng,
     Y., Ogiwara, A., Meissen, J., Showalter, M., Takeuchi, K., Kind, T.,
     Beal, P., Arita, M., Fiehn, O.: Identifying metabolites by integrat-
     ing metabolome databases with mass spectrometry cheminformatics.
     Nature Methods 15(1), 53–56 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.
     4512. Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Accessed 2023-
     03-07

[94] Ridder, L., Hooft, J.J.J.v.d., Verhoeven, S.: Automatic Compound
     Annotation from Mass Spectrometry Data Using MAGMa. Mass Spec-
     trometry 3(Special Issue 2), 0033–0033 (2014). https://doi.org/10.5702/
     massspectrometry.S0033

[95] Bauer, C.A., Grimme, S.: How to Compute Electron Ionization Mass
     Spectra from First Principles. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
     120(21), 3755–3766 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.6b02907.
     Publisher: American Chemical Society. Accessed 2022-11-09

[96] Irikura, K.K.: Ab Initio Computation of Energy Deposition During Elec-
     tron Ionization of Molecules. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
     121(40), 7751–7760 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.7b07993.
     Publisher: American Chemical Society. Accessed 2023-01-15

[97] Guerra, M., Parente, F., Indelicato, P., Santos, J.P.: Modified binary
     encounter Bethe model for electron-impact ionization. International
     Journal of Mass Spectrometry 313, 1–7 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/
     j.ijms.2011.12.003. arXiv:1306.2826 [physics]. Accessed 2023-01-15

[98] Spackman, P.R., Bohman, B., Karton, A., Jayatilaka, D.: Quan-
     tum chemical electron impact mass spectrum prediction for
     de novo structure elucidation: Assessment against experimental
     reference data and comparison to competitive fragmenta-
     tion modeling. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry
     118(2), 25460 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/qua.25460. eprint:
     https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/qua.25460. Accessed
     2022-11-09

[99] Koopman, J., Grimme, S.: From QCEIMS to QCxMS: A Tool to Rou-
     tinely Calculate CID Mass Spectra Using Molecular Dynamics. Journal
     of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 32(7), 1735–1751 (2021).
                                                             MassFormer        35

      https://doi.org/10.1021/jasms.1c00098. Accessed 2021-11-14

[100] Schreckenbach, S.A., Anderson, J.S.M., Koopman, J., Grimme, S., Simp-
      son, M.J., Jobst, K.J.: Predicting the Mass Spectra of Environmental
      Pollutants Using Computational Chemistry: A Case Study and Criti-
      cal Evaluation. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry
      32(6), 1508–1518 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1021/jasms.1c00078. Pub-
      lisher: American Society for Mass Spectrometry. Published by the
      American Chemical Society. All rights reserved. Accessed 2022-11-09

[101] Spackman, P.R., Bohman, B., Karton, A., Jayatilaka, D.: Quan-
      tum chemical electron impact mass spectrum prediction for
      de novo structure elucidation: Assessment against experimental
      reference data and comparison to competitive fragmenta-
      tion modeling. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry
      118(2), 25460 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/qua.25460. eprint:
      https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/qua.25460. Accessed
      2022-11-09

[102] Wang, S., Kind, T., Tantillo, D.J., Fiehn, O.: Predicting in silico electron
      ionization mass spectra using quantum chemistry. Journal of Cheminfor-
      matics 12(1), 63 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-020-00470-3.
      Accessed 2023-01-15

[103] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep Residual Learning for
      Image Recognition. arXiv. arXiv:1512.03385 [cs] (2015). https://doi.org/
      10.48550/arXiv.1512.03385. http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385 Accessed
      2023-01-16

[104] Buchanan, B.G., Feigenbaum, E.A.: DENDRAL and Meta-DENDRAL:
      Their Applications Dimension. Technical report, STANFORD UNIV
      CALIF DEPT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE (February 1978). https:
      //apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA054289 Accessed 2021-11-04

[105] Scheubert, K., Hufsky, F., Rasche, F., Böcker, S.: Computing Fragmenta-
      tion Trees from Metabolite Multiple Mass Spectrometry Data. In: Bafna,
      V., Sahinalp, S.C. (eds.) Research in Computational Molecular Biol-
      ogy. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 377–391. Springer, Berlin,
      Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20036-6 36

[106] Böcker, S., Dührkop, K.: Fragmentation trees reloaded. Journal of Chem-
      informatics 8(1), 5 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-016-0116-8.
      Accessed 2021-11-04

[107] Dührkop, K., Shen, H., Meusel, M., Rousu, J., Böcker, S.:
36    MassFormer

     Searching molecular structure databases with tandem mass spec-
     tra using csi:fingerid. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
     ences 112(41), 12580–12585 (2015) https://arxiv.org/abs/https://www.
     pnas.org/content/112/41/12580.full.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
     1509788112

[108] Curry, B.U., Rumelhart, D.: A Neural Network That Classi-
      fies Mass Spectra (2001). https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/
      A-Neural-Network-That-Classifies-Mass-Spectra-Curry-Rumelhart/
      09cc37106e61f2fd1f1dc881de24951a6498b354 Accessed 2021-10-25

[109] Lim, J., Wong, J., Wong, M.X., Tan, L.H.E., Chieu, H.L., Choo, D.,
      Neo, N.K.N.: Chemical Structure Elucidation from Mass Spectrome-
      try by Matching Substructures. arXiv:1811.07886 [physics, stat] (2018).
      Accessed 2021-11-04
                                                                       MassFormer         37

7 Extended Data Figures

                        Total                      Reinit      Reinit         Cosine
     Configuration                  Pre-trained
                       # Layers                    Layers    Layernorm       Similarity
         Small            6              No          -           -          .662 ± .002
         Large             12            No           -           -         .609 ± .037
       Large+PT            12           Yes         11-12        No         .679 ± .001
    Large+PT+TL            12           Yes         1-12         No         .678 ± .001
    Large+PT+LN            12           Yes         11-12        Yes        .686 ± .001
      Large+PT
                           12           Yes         1-12         Yes        .689 ± .001
      +TL+LN

Extended Data Table 1 A table summarizing the different model configurations in the
ablation experiments (all results are on the NIST-Scaffold Test set). The Large configuration
used a standard Graphormer module, without pre-training. The Small configuration used a
scaled-down Graphormer module (≈ 27% of the Large model’s parameters), also without
pre-training. PT refers to initializing the graph transformer and input embedding layers
with pre-trained parameters (from the PubChemQC task, see Section 4.4 for more details)
and then fine-tuning. The default fine-tuning strategy (Large+PT) involved randomly
re-initializing only the last 2 transformer layers (out of a possible 12) before fine-tuning.
LN refers to layer norm parameter re-initialization, and TL refers to re-initializing all of
the transformer layers (instead of just the last 2). It appears that pre-training (PT) was
essential for training a Large model, and layer norm parameter re-initialization (LN) was
also beneficial. Surprisingly, full transformer layer reinitialization (TL) did not seem to
result in degraded performance. In fact, the only difference in parameter initialization
between Large+PT+TL+LN and Large was the token embedding parameters (which were
pre-trained); all other parameters of both models were randomly initialized. This suggests
that the token embeddings were the most transferable component of the pre-training
procedure, since the other parts of the model could be reset without losing performance.
Averages and standard deviations from 10 independently trained models are reported.
38      MassFormer




                                     (a) MassFormer




                                         (b) CFM
Extended Data Figure 1 ClassyFire Similarity Experiments. Performance on the
top 10 most frequent chemical classes, as identified by ClassyFire, in the NIST-Scaffold Test
Set ([M+H]+ adducts only). Scores reported for both MassFormer (1a) and CFM (1b). The
chemical classes are sorted from most to least frequent on the x-axis, and are not disjoint.
Note the difference in y-axis range between the two plots. The average performance for each
model (across all compounds) is indicated by a black dashed line. MassFormer had superior
performance to CFM in each category. Strikingly, MassFormer seemed to perform best on
“lipids and lipid-like molecules”, which is one class that CFM seems to struggle with. This
could be explained by the fact that many lipids are known to have simple fragmentation
rules, which might make them easier to learn. However, since lipids can be quite large, any
algorithm which relies on combinatorial fragmentation (like CFM) would struggle. Averages
and standard deviations from 10 independently trained models are reported (except for
CFM, which was pre-trained).
                                                                    MassFormer          39




                                  (a) [M+H]+ Adduct




                                    (b) All Adducts
Extended Data Figure 2 Additional Spectrum Similarity Experiments. These
experiments were similar to Figure 2c, but did not involve filtering compounds from the
test set based on overlap with CFM’s training set. This allowed for larger test set sizes
and more rigorous comparisons between deep learning approaches. In 2a, all models were
trained and evaluated only on [M+H]+ spectra, but in 2b all six supported precursor adducts
were included. MassFormer boasted strong performance in both cases. Training set sizes are
indicated for each split. Averages and standard deviations from 10 independently trained
models are reported. Statistical significance determined by one-sided Welch’s t-test with
Šidák correction.
40     MassFormer




                              (a) Log Rank Distribution




                        (b) Log Normalized Rank Distribution
Extended Data Figure 3 Spectrum Identification Ranking Distributions. The
unnormalized (3a) and normalized (3b) distributions of the true candidate rank, for CASMI
and pCASMI queries. Note that for rank metrics, a lower score is better. MassFormer’s rank
distributions are more strongly skewed towards lower values, with fewer extreme outliers.
Boxplot lines represent median and interquartile range, whiskers represent 1.5 times the
interquartile range, and the “X” symbol represents the mean.
                                                                        MassFormer            41




            (a) Similarity = 0.40                            (b) Similarity = 0.46




            (c) Similarity = 0.54                            (d) Similarity = 0.58




            (e) Similarity = 0.60                            (f) Similarity = 0.65

Extended Data Figure 4 Additional Spectra (Inaccurate Examples). True and
predicted spectra, roughly covering a range of 0.4 to 0.7 cosine similarity, and their associated
attention map visualizations. All spectra correspond to [M+H]+ precursor adducts and have
been merged over multiple collision energies.
42      MassFormer




           (a) Similarity = 0.76                           (b) Similarity = 0.79




           (c) Similarity = 0.82                           (d) Similarity = 0.88




           (e) Similarity = 0.92                           (f) Similarity = 0.97

Extended Data Figure 5 Additional Spectra (Accurate Examples). True and pre-
dicted spectra, roughly covering a range of 0.7 to 1.0 cosine similarity, and their associated
attention map visualizations. All spectra correspond to [M+H]+ precursor adducts and have
been merged over multiple collision energies.
                                                                       MassFormer           43




    (a) Chlorine (N = 752, p < 10−15 )               (b) Sulfur (N = 212, p < 10−17 )




    (c) Fluorine (N = 118, p < 10−4 )              (d) Phosphorus (N = 33, p < 10−3 )
Extended Data Figure 6 Additional Heteroatom Peak Separability Experi-
ments. Linear peak classification accuracy distributions, similar to Figure 4c but for the
other non-Oxygen heteroatoms: Chlorine (6a), Sulfur (6b), Fluorine (6c), Phosphorus (6d).
For each heteroatom, the distribution of optimal linear classification accuracy induced by the
heteroatom labelling strategy was markedly different from the random labelling distribution
(higher accuracy indicates improved separability of the peaks). Sample size and statistical
significance (Welch’s t-test with Šidák correction) for separability differences are provided
for each plot.
44     MassFormer

8 Supplementary Notes
8.1 Previous Work in Spectrum Prediction
The statistical theory of mass spectrometry was first formulated in the 1950s
[80, 81]. While significant progress has been made, an accurate and general
model for spectrum prediction remains elusive [82, 83]. Over the past 30
years, the proliferation of accessible, powerful computing has resulted in the
development of a variety of computational methods for spectrum prediction.
Rule-based fragmentation algorithms use experimentally derived fragmenta-
tion rules to predict fragment peak locations. They are simple to implement,
and can be particularly useful for certain classes of compounds (like lipids
[21, 41, 84] and peptides [85–87]) whose regular structure results in pre-
dictable fragmentation locations. These methods can also work for more
structurally diverse groups of molecules like metabolites [88, 89], but have dif-
ficulty generalizing to unseen compounds. Combinatorial methods [90–94] rely
on iterative bond-breaking to identify possible fragments and their associated
peak locations. These methods have high fragment recall, but provide lim-
ited information about peak intensity. Competitive Fragmentation Modelling
(CFM [20, 22]) extends the combinatorial approach by defining a probabilistic
graphical model over the fragment space. Through modelling bond breakages
as a markov process, CFM runs a stochastic simulation to identify which frag-
ments are most likely to appear in the spectrum, and uses this to inform its
intensity predictions. While highly interpretable, all combinatorial approaches
suffer when the space of fragments explodes, as is the case with larger molecules
and particularly molecules with multiple rings.
    In contrast to heuristic and data-driven approaches, first principles meth-
ods rely on quantum chemical simulations of the fragmentation process to
estimate spectra. A number of techniques have been developed for predict-
ing electron ionization mass spectrometry (EI-MS) [95–97], which is simpler
to model than the electrospray ionization spectrometry (ESI-MS) that is
commonly used for LC-MS/MS. QCxMS is a Born-Oppenheimer Molecular
Dynamics approach originally developed for EI-MS [98], but recently extended
to ESI-MS [99]. It uses trajectories sampled from ab initio molecular dynam-
ics simulations to define a distribution over fragments. While first-principles
approaches promise improved generalization and are highly interpretable,
existing implementations require computationally expensive simulations. Such
methods are suitable for targeted studies [100, 101], but have limited utility
for high-throughput analysis [102]. Additionally, current models only support
a small range of experimental conditions [99] and lack extensive benchmarking
[102].
    More recently, deep learning approaches for spectrum prediction have been
introduced. The NEIMS model [27], developed for EI-MS data, uses a ResNet-
inspired architecture [103] to predict spectra from a molecular fingerprint
representation [57] of the input molecule. Graph neural networks (GNNs)
[28, 29] have also successfully been applied for ESI-MS prediction. While less
                                                            MassFormer        45

interpretable than other methods, deep learning approaches offer a number
of compelling advantages. Neural networks can learn complex fragmentation
patterns without relying on expensive combinatorial or quantum chemical cal-
culations, which makes their runtimes faster and less dependent on the size of
the input molecule. Compared to other data-driven approaches (like CFM),
deep learning models can more efficiently leverage larger spectral datasets.
They are also more flexible with respect to the properties of the compounds
(i.e. inorganic atoms, ring structures) and spectra (i.e. ionization type, colli-
sion energy) that are modelled, and can be easily adapted to work with new
kinds of data.

8.2 Concurrent Work in Spectrum Prediction
A number of deep learning spectrum predictors, developed concurrently to
this work, explore different strategies for spectrum prediction. 3DMolMS (3D
Molecular Network for Mass Spectra Prediction, [35]) is perhaps most similar
to Massformer, producing relatively low-resolution binned spectrum predic-
tions. However, it incorporates 3D molecule information by running conformer
simulations (generated by RDKit [39]) as a preprocessing step on the input
molecular graph, and uses a custom GNN-like architecture to levereage the
estimated atom locations in 3D space. Despite the limited accuracy of such
simple conformer simulations, the additional positional information seems to
improve performance, particularly in the low-data regime. Crucially, 3DMolMS
is trained on Q-TOF data, unlike MassFormer which is only trained on Orbi-
trap spectra. GrAFF (Graph neural network for Approximation via Fixed
Formulas of Mass Spectra, [33]) models spectra as a distribution over a fixed
vocabulary of formulae. This method depends on the empirical observation
that most peaks in small molecule spectra likely can be explained with either
a common small formula or a less common larger formula that can be derived
from the precursor formula and a common neutral loss. Formulating spec-
trum prediction as formula classification allows for arbitrarily high resolution
predictions with automatic formula annotations, which is compelling. How-
ever, this approach is fundamentally limited by the heuristically-derived set of
formulae, and may not generalize to new data. SCARF (Subformulae Classi-
fication for Autoregressively Reconstructing Fragmentations, [34]) is a closely
related method that also performs formula classification. Instead of using a
fixed vocabulary of formulae, SCARF parameterizes a distribution over all pos-
sible sub-formulae of the precursor formula using a prefix tree. This approach
allows auto-regressive formula prediction, which can be trained in a supervised
manner using formula annotations derived from formula annotation tools like
SIRIUS [45] or MAGMa [94]. A major limitation of SCARF is that it cannot
model collision energy, and can only predict spectra that are merged across
multiple energies. Additionally, while both GrAFF and SCARF provide for-
mula annotations, they do not provide full substructure annotations like CFM.
RASSP (Rapid Approximate Subset-Based Spectra Prediction for Electron
Ionization-Mass Spectrometry, [36]) is another recent model that attempts
46     MassFormer

to provide more complete annotations, albeit for EI spectra instead of ESI-
MS/MS. It works by applying a heuristic bond-breaking algorithm (like CFM)
to generate subfragments of the input molecule, then predicting a distribution
over these subfragments, which induces a distribution on formulae and can
then be mapped to a spectrum.
    It is not possible to directly compare MassFormer with these other mod-
els without a standardized training and evaluation protocol. Three of the four
methods (all except GrAFF) provide public code implementations, but differ
significantly in terms of the types of spectra that they model: namely, the ion-
ization mode, precursor adducts, and collision energies which are supported.
Three of the methods (GrAFF, SCARF, RASSP) present clear advantages in
terms of prediction resolution and peak annotations when compared to Mass-
Former. However, these methods also rely on hand-designed heuristics (either
for vocabulary generation or recursive bond breaking), which may affect their
generalization on different types of compounds (particularly larger compounds
where the heuristics may not apply). Additionally, in terms of prediction speed,
MassFormer is likely to be faster than both SCARF (due to its autoregressive
formula prediction) and RASSP (due to its combinatorial fragmentation), but
may be comparable with 3DMolMS and GrAFF. Rigorous benchmarking is
necessary to properly characterize each model’s strengths and weaknesses.

8.3 Compound Identification
The first algorithms for MS-based compound identification arose in the 1960s.
DENDRAL and Meta-DENDRAL [104] were early AI projects aimed at auto-
matically learning fragmentation rules from MS data, to help identify new
molecules. Since then, algorithmic advances and increased data availability
have resulted in more powerful methods. Many of the spectrum prediction
models from Sections 8.1 and 8.2 have also been applied to spectrum identi-
fication [22, 27–29, 34, 36, 88, 89, 91–94, 99], typically by generating in silico
libraries to compare against query spectra. However, there are other meth-
ods that do not require directly predicting spectra. Many modern approaches
rely on fragmentation trees [105, 106] to represent spectra. Such tree repre-
sentations are useful because they provide an interpretable description of the
fragmentation process, and can be inferred directly from the peak information
in the spectrum. Tree kernels are used to compute similarity between spectra
[107]. This allows for the development of kernel algorithms that infer compound
identity by predicting properties from the fragmentation tree directly and
searching chemical databases to find candidates that match those properties
[45, 52, 107]. There are also methods for predicting substructure directly from
the spectrum, without relying on fragmentation trees. Some works [108, 109]
use neural networks to predict substructure labels and find candidate molecules
that match those substructures. More recently, transformer approaches for
spectrum-to-structure prediction [53] have shown promise with identification of
Q-TOF spectra, relying on large libraries of combinatorially simulated spectra
[91] for pre-training.
