                                                       Rapid Prediction of Electron-Ionization Mass
                                                              Spectrometry using Neural Networks




arXiv:1811.08545v2 [physics.chem-ph] 17 Mar 2019
                                                       Jennifer N. Wei,∗,†,‡ David Belanger,∗,† Ryan P. Adams,¶ and D. Sculley†

                                                                           †Google Brain, Cambridge MA 02142, USA
                                                     ‡Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge MA
                                                                                           02138, USA
                                                     ¶Departmment of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08540, USA

                                                                      E-mail: weijennifer@google.com; dbelanger@google.com



                                                   Abstract

                                                   When confronted with a substance of unknown identity, researchers often perform mass
                                                   spectrometry on the sample and compare the observed spectrum to a library of previously-
                                                   collected spectra to identify the molecule. While popular, this approach will fail to identify
                                                   molecules that are not in the existing library. In response, we propose to improve the li-
                                                   brary’s coverage by augmenting it with synthetic spectra that are predicted from candidate
                                                   molecules using machine learning. We contribute a lightweight neural network model that
                                                   quickly predicts mass spectra for small molecules, averaging 5 ms per molecule with a recall-
                                                   at-10 accuracy of 91.8%. Achieving high-accuracy predictions requires a novel neural network
                                                   architecture that is designed to capture typical fragmentation patterns from electron ioniza-
                                                   tion. We analyze the effects of our modeling innovations on library matching performance
                                                   and compare our models to prior machine learning-based work on spectrum prediction.



                                                                                                 1
Introduction

Mass spectrometry (MS) is an important tool used to identify unknown molecular samples
in a variety of applications, from characterization of organic synthesis products, to pharma-
cokinetic studies, 1 to forensic studies, 2 to analyzing gaseous samples on remote satellites. 3 In
electron-ionization mass spectrometry (EI-MS), molecular samples are ionized by an electron
beam and broken into fragments. The resultant ions are separated by an electric field until
they reach a detector. The mass spectrum is a distribution of the frequency or intensity of
each type of ion, ordered by mass-to-charge (m/z ) ratio.
   A popular method for identifying a sample from its mass spectrum is to look up the
sample’s spectrum in a reference library. 4,5 Here, a similarity function is used to measure
the similarity between the query spectrum from the sample and each spectrum in the library.
If the measurement noise when obtaining the query spectrum is reasonable, then the library
spectrum with the highest similarity will correspond to the correct identification of the
sample. 6,7 A schematic of this process is shown in Figure 1a.
   This library matching approach is very popular, but it suffers from a coverage problem:
if the sample consists of a molecule that is not in the library, then correct identification
is impossible. This is an issue in practice, since existing mass spectral reference libraries,
such as the NIST/NIH/EPA MS database, 4 Wiley Registry of Mass Spectral Data, 5 and
MassBank 8 only contain hundreds of thousands of reference spectra. The coverage problem
could be reduced by recording spectra for additional molecules, but this is time consuming
and expensive. For example, NIST releases updates to its library every 3 years, containing
roughly 20,000 new spectra. Additionally, mass spectra of new molecules are only added to
the library if the molecule is of common interest; molecules for newly synthesized compounds
are typically not incorporated . 4,9
   An alternative solution is to use de novo methods that input a spectrum and directly
generate a molecule, without using a fixed list of molecules; we discuss some of these methods
in the Background section. These approaches currently have low-accuracy and are difficult

                                                2
for practitioners to incorporate into their existing work-flows.
   Another method for alleviating the coverage problem is to augment existing libraries
with synthetic spectra that are generated by a model. Thus far, this approach has not
been practical, as existing spectrum prediction methods are very computationally expensive.
These prediction models use quantum mechanics calculations 10–12 or machine learning 13 to
estimate the probability of each bond breaking under ionization, and thus the frequency of
each ion fragment. Since these methods must either compute molecular orbital energies with
high accuracy using expensive calculations, or else stochastically simulate the fragmentation
of the molecule, the time needed for each model to make a prediction scales with the size
of the molecule, taking up to 10 min for large molecules. 10,13 For applications of identifying
metabolites from a metabolomic spectra, much faster predictions of individual molecular
spectra are required. 14
   In response, we present Neural Electron Ionization Mass Spectrometry (NEIMS), a neu-
ral network that predicts the electron-ionization mass spectrum for a given small molecule.
Since our model directly predicts spectra, instead of bond breaking probabilities, it is dra-
matically faster than previously reported methods, making it possible to generate predictions
for thousands of possible candidates in seconds. Furthermore, the approach does not rely on
specific details of EI, and thus our model could be easily retrained to predict mass spectra
for other ionization methods.    We envision that this tool can expand coverage in areas of
molecular space of interest to researchers that are likely candidates for the identity of the
molecule.
   We test the performance of our model by predicting mass spectra for small molecules from
the NIST 2017 Mass Spectral Library. We find that the predictive capability of our model
is similar to previously reported machine learning models, but requires much less time to
make predictions. Additionally, we report the similarity of the spectra predicted by NEIMS.
The code repository for NEIMS is publicly available at github.com/brain-research/deep-
molecular-massspec.


                                               3
Background

De novo prediction of molecules from mass spectra

Several algorithms have been developed previously for either predicting spectra or for pre-
dicting the molecule’s identity given the spectrum. One of the earliest efforts in artificial
intelligence was a model used to identify molecules from their mass spectrum. Heuristic
DENDRAL (Dentritic Algorithm) was a collaboration between chemists and computer sci-
entists at Stanford in the 1960s. 15 This algorithm used expert rules from chemistry to help
identify patterns in the spectra and suggest possible identities for the molecule. A few years
later, Meta DENDRAL was introduced to learn the expert rules that originally been given
to Heuristic DENDRAL. 16
   Since then, several models have been reported to predict identities of samples directly
from the spectrum. Many have been developed for tandem mass spectrometry, where the
task is to predict the original peptide sequences from digested fragments given the mass
spectrum. 17 Some of these methods use machine learning to achieve this task. 18,19 Several
previously published models use neural network models to analyze mass spectra to predict
molecule directly. One approach predicts the fingerprint from the spectrum and looks up
the fingerprint in a library of fingerprints. 20 Another approach predicts the molecule di-
rectly either as a SMILES representation 21,22 or from a ranked list of possible structural
conformers. 23


Prediction of mass spectra from molecules

In this work, we focus on the prediction of spectra from molecules. The advantage of this
approach over de novo approaches is that new libraries of synthetic spectra can be easily
incorporated into the existing mass spectrometry software to improve the coverage of existing
libraries.
   The first prediction methods for EI-MS spectrum used quantum mechanical simulation


                                              4
techniques to predict fragmentation events. There are three methods of predicting the mass
spectrum using first principles. 10 The first is to use quasi-equilibrium theory, also known as
Rice-Ramsberger-Kassel-Marcus theory, to estimate the rate constants for ionization reac-
tion. 24–26 The second is to estimate the bond order energies within a molecule, and estimate
where a molecule may fragment. A related method to this second method is to calculate the
cross-section of molecular orbitals upon electron impact to predict the molecule’s ionization
behavior. 12,27 The third method uses Born-Oppenheimer Molecular Dynamics. Quantum
Chemistry Electron-Ionization Mass Spectrometry (QCEIMS) is a particularly recent exam-
ple of the ab initio molecular dynamics method. 10,11,28 The trajectories resulting from this
simulation are then analyzed for the presence of ionic fragments. The distribution of the ion
fragments aggregated from all the simulations is then renormalized to generate a calculated
EI-MS spectrum. Each of these methods requires at least 1000 seconds per molecule, 13 and
may even take days or weeks for molecules of 50 atoms. While these methods may be fast for
methods involving density functional theory, they do not have the speed needed to rapidly
generate a collection of spectra thousands of molecules. Furthermore, some of the basis sets
used for the density functional theory might not support the presence of inorganic atoms.
   Allen et al. 13 introduced a machine learning model, Competitive Fragmentation Modeling-
Electron Ioinization (CFM-EI), to predict EI-MS spectra. This probabilistic model predicts
the probability of breaking molecular bonds under electron ionization, and also predicts the
charged fragment that is likely to form. In order to generate the spectra, it is necessary
to run a stochastic simulation to determine the frequency of each molecular fragment. In
results section, we directly compare this method with our proposed model.



Methods

Our goal is to design a model that will accurately predict the EI-MS spectrum for any
molecule. This will be used to produce an augmented reference library containing both



                                              5
                                              (a)




                                              (b)

Figure 1: Library matching task. (a) Depiction of how query spectra are matched to a collection
of reference spectra as performed by mass spectrometry software. (b) Query spectra are compared
against a library comprising of spectra from the NIST 2017 main library and spectra predicted by
our model (outlined in blue). Spectral images adapted from NIST Webbook. 29




                                               6
predicted spectra and experimentally-measured spectra. This task is outlined in Figure 1b.
   We first discuss our choice of similarity metrics for mass spectra. Next, we describe our
method for spectra prediction, describing our new architecture which is required for high
accuracy of mass spectra. We then explain how we evaluate our model’s impact on the
library matching task.


Similarity Metrics for Mass Spectra

The ability to a match a query spectrum from a sample to the correct spectrum in the library
depends on the choice of similarity metric between spectra. 7,30 A weighted cosine similarity
is commonly used by mass spectrometry software. The exact form of the cosine similarity is
given below: 7

                                                 PMmax       0.5       0.5
                                                      k=1mk Iqk  · mk Ilk
                  Similarity(I q , I l ) = P                                       .        (1)
                                            Mq        0.5 2
                                                              PM l           0.5 2
                                            k=1 (mk Iqk  )        k=1 (m k Ilk  )

Here, I q and I l are vectors of m/z intensities representing the query spectrum and the
library spectrum respectively, mk and Ik are the mass-to-charge ratio and intensity found at
m/z = k, Ml and Mq are the largest indices of I q and I l with nonzero values,and Mmax is
the larger of Ml and Mq . The motivation for the weighting by m/z is because the peaks in
mass spectra corresponding to larger fragments are more characteristic and useful in practice
for identifying the true molecule.
   Other similarity metrics besides cosine distance similarities are also employed. For ex-
ample, one other similarity method involves estimating the relative importance of one peak
given the other peaks. 30 Other methods uses a Euclidian difference between peaks, or use a
variation of the Hamming distance. 7,31 Another similarity metric accounts for neutral losses,
or the intensity peaks corresponding to the loss of small, neutral fragments from the original
molecular ion. 32 It is also possible to use the same form of the similarity function as in (1),
but with different weighting given to the intensity or the masses. 7 In principle, machine


                                                  7
learning could be also used to learn a parametrized similarity metric that yields improved
library matching performance. However, this custom metric would be difficult to deploy,
since it would require changing the software used by practitioners.
   We develop our model with the assumption that Eq. (1) will be used for the similarity
metric in downstream library matching software that consumes an augmented library.


Spectral Prediction

We treat the prediction of mass spectrometry spectra as a multidimensional regression task.
The output of our model is a vector that represents the intensity at every integral m/z bin.
We use this discretization granularity for m/z because it is what is provided in the NIST
data sets we use for training our model.
   In the NEIMS model (Figure 3), we first map molecules to additive Extended Circu-
lar Fingerprints (ECFPs). 33 These fingerprints are similar to their binary counterparts 34
in that they record molecular subgraphs made up from local neighborhoods around each
atom node in the molecule, but differ in that they count the occurrences for each subgroup.
This information is then hashed into a vector representation. The difference is that additive
fingerprints record the frequency that each bit is set, rather than just the presence. The RD-
Kit Cheminformatics package 33 was used to generate the fingerprints. We use a fingerprint
length of 4096 with a radius of 2. These features are then passed into a multilayer percep-
tron neural network (MLP). To account for some of the physical phenomena of ionization,
we make some application-specific adjustments to the prediction from the MLP, described
in the ’Adjustments for Physical Phenomena’ section.
   In the Library Matching Results section, we compare the performance of NEIMS to that
of a simple linear regression (LR) model. Here, we apply a linear transformation to the
ECFP features.
   To train the model, we use a modified mean-squared-error loss function. This loss func-
tion, shown below, follows the same weighting pattern as in Eq. 1:


                                              8
                                                                                 2
                              M (x)                                        0.5
                              X                mk Ik0.5             mk Iˆk
                 L(I, Î) =           
                                          PM                    − P                     (2)
                                                      0.5 2        M       ˆ 0.5 2
                              k=1            k=1 (mk Ik )          k=1 (m  I
                                                                          k k   )

   where I is the ground truth spectrum, Iˆ is the predicted spectrum, and M (x) is the mass
of the input molecule. We used stochastic gradient descent to optimize the parameters of
the MLP with the Adam optimizer. 35 We use Tensorflow 36 to construct and train the model.


Adjustments for Physical Phenomena

In practice, we have found that the conventional MLP described in the previous section
struggles to accurately predict the right-hand side of spectra (Figure 2a). Errors in this
region, which correspond to large m/z, are particularly damaging for library matching with
the weighting in (1).
   This section introduces a revised neural network architecture (Figure 3) designed to
better model the underlying fragmentation process that occurs in mass spectrometry. We
have found that it improves prediction in the high mass region of the spectrum (Figure 2b),
which yields improvements in library matching as discussed in the Results section.
   As is standard for MLPs used for regression, the predictions of the above MLP model
on an input molecule x are an affine transformation of a set of features f (x), which are
computed by all but the final layer of the network. For reasons that will become apparent,
we refer to the above MLP as performing forward prediction. At bin m/z = i, we have the
following predicted intensity:
                                          pfi (x) = wif > f (x) + bfi ,                  (3)

where wif and bfi are the model’s weights and biases for forward prediction at bin i.
   The input ECFP features, from which f (x) is computed, capture local structures in
the molecule, so generally f (x) will be more accurate in capturing the presence of small
substructures of molecule x. Often, there is a direct correspondence between the presence



                                                       9
of such substructures and spectral peaks with small m/z. For example, in Figure 2a a
peak occurs at m/z = 35, due to the presence of chlorine. Therefore an accurate forward
prediction model will have a learned weight w35 that will output a high intensity at i = 35
if there is evidence in f (x) for the presence of chlorine.




Figure 2: Spectral prediction with MLP forward model (a) and MLP bidirectional model (b). For
both spectra plots, the true spectrum is shown in blue on top, while the predicted spectrum is
shown inverted in red. Note that the spectrum predicted by the bidirectional model shows fewer
stray peaks than the forward model, particularly for larger m/z values. These peaks are much
easier to predict with the reverse prediction mode.


   On the other hand, forward prediction often struggles to accurately predict intensities
for large fragments that are the result of neutral losses. 6 One reason for this is that the
composition of large fragments is not captured well by the ECFP representation. Another
reason is that information learned about the cleavage of a small group does not transfer well
across molecules of different masses. For pentachlorobenzene, which has a molecular mass of
250 Da, the fragment that results from the loss of a neutral chlorine atom results in a peak at
215 Da. Meanwhile, for chlorobenzene, which has a mass of 112 Da, the fragment resulting
from a loss of a chlorine atom would have a peak at 77 Da. Despite the clear relationship


                                               10
between these intensity peaks, the forward model is not parametrized to capture this pattern.
   In response, following the physical phenomenon that created the fragments, we define
larger ion peaks as a function of the residual groups that were broken off from the original
molecule. Referring to our previous example of pentachlorobenzene (M (x) = 250), we can
parametrize the m/z ratio of the fragment which lost a chlorine group as m/z = 250 − 35 =
215. The corresponding fragment in chlorobenzene would have a mass of m/z = 215 − 35 =
77. By defining the peaks in this way, it is possible for these predictions of spectral intensities
to be linked by the prediction at index 35. This leads to the indexing scheme of our reverse
prediction model:
                                  prM (x)+τ −i (x) = wir> f (x) + bri ,                        (4)

Here, τ > 0 is a small shift that allows for peaks to occur at intensities greater than M (x),
due to isotopes. In practice, reverse prediction is implemented using a copy of the forward
model, with separate sets of parameters for the final affine layer, but shared parameters
for f (x). The outputs of this model are postprocessed on a per-molecule basis to obey the
indexing in (4), which depends on each molecule’s mass.
   Both the forward and reverse predictions are combined to form a bidirectional prediction.
That is, the final prediction at index i is a combination of both pfi and pri . In the case of
pentachlorobenzene, the prediction of spectral intensity at m/z = 215 is a function of pf215
from the forward mode and pr35+τ from the reverse mode. Instead of simply averaging the
two prediction modes, we have found that small additional performance improvements can
be obtained using a coordinate-wise gate. Here, the output pi (x) at position i is given by:


                         pi (x) = σ(gatei ) pfi (x) + (1 − σ(gatei )) pri (x),                 (5)


where gatei is an affine transformation of f (x) and σ(·) is a sigmoid function. This approach
echoes the formulation of the Hybrid Similarity Search designed by Moorthy et al., 32 which
accounts for peaks that are created by small fragment ions and those which are created by


                                                   11
large fragments which have lost smaller groups.
   Finally, for all models, we zero out predicted intensities at m/z that are greater than
M (x) + τ .
   By adding these features, we incorporate some of the physical phenomena that occur
in mass spectrometry into our model while maintaining the overall simplicity of the MLP.
In this way, we are able to predict the spectrum directly without resorting to sampling
bond-breaking events within the molecule, which requires subsequent stochastic sampling to
obtain a spectrum.




Figure 3: Molecular representations are passed into a multilayer perceptron to generate an initial
output. This output is used to make a forward prediction starting at m/z = 0 and m/z = M and in
reverse starting from m/z = M and ending at m/z = 0. A sigmoid gating is applied to the inputs
as shown in Eq. 5




Library Matching Evaluation

We evaluate NEIMS using an augmented reference library consisting of a combination of
observed spectra and model-predicted spectra, with library matching performance computed
with respect to a query set of spectra. These are from the NIST 2017 replicates library, which
is a collection of noisier spectra for molecules that are contained in the NIST main library.
The inconsistencies in these spectra reflect experimental variation, and make an informative
data set to test our model’s performance.

                                               12
   To construct the augmented reference library, we edit the NIST main library, removing
spectra corresponding to the query set molecules and replacing them with the predictions
from NEIMS. We then perform library matching and calculate the similarity between each
query spectrum and every spectrum from the augmented library. We record the rank of
the correct spectrum, i.e. the rank of the predicted spectrum corresponding to the molecule
which made the query spectrum. The similarity metric is Eq. (1).
   For the purposes of tuning model hyperparameters, we chose to optimize recall@10, i.e.
the percentage of our query set for which the correct spectra had a matching rank of less
than or equal to 10 in the library matching task. Half of the replicates library was used for
tuning hyperparameters, and the remaining half was used to evaluate test performance. All
models were trained on the spectra prediction task for 100,000 training steps with a batch
size of 100.
   During the library match search, we have a mass filtering option. This feature reduces
the library size so it only includes spectra from molecular candidates that have a molecular
mass that differ by a few Daltons from the mass of the query molecule. If the EI-MS analysis
is combined with mass spectrometry techniques using soft ionization methods, it is possible
to determine the mass of the molecule being analyzed. In the CFM-EI model, the molecular
formula is used to filter the search library . 13 Using the molecular mass to filter the library
allows more possible candidate spectra to be considered in the search than using a molecular
formula filter.



Results and Discussion

To analyze the performance of the models, we trained with 240,942 spectra from the NIST
2017 Mass Spectral Main Library. These spectra were selected so that no molecules in the
replicates library have spectra in the training set.
   After hyperparameter tuning using Vizier, 37 we found that the optimal MLP architecture



                                              13
has seven layers of 2000 nodes, with residual network connections between the layers, 38 using
ReLU activation and a dropout rate of 0.25.


Library Matching Results




                           (a)                                            (b)

Figure 4: Performance of different model architectures. Figure a) compares the recall@10 accuracy
of the linear regression model and the multi-layer perceptron model using the forward, reverse, and
bidirectional architecture. Figure b) shows the performance of NEIMS at different recall levels, and
compares it against the performance of using the NIST main library itself.


   We first examine the effects of our various modeling decisions on performance. Figure
4a compares the performance of forward, reverse, and bidirectional versions of the linear
regression and MLP models on the library matching task. For bidirectional prediction in the
linear regression model, the forward and reverse predictions are simply averaged together,
rather than applying the gate described in (5).
   The top row of Figure 4a shows that it is not possible to achieve perfect recall accuracy
on the library matching task even when using the full NIST main library as the reference
library, without any model-predicted spectra. Observing Figure 4b we see that using the
NIST main library as the reference library, we have 86% recall@1 accuracy, and 98.3%
recall@10 accuracy. This serves as a practical upper bound on achievable library matching
accuracy and reflects the experimental inconsistencies between between the main library
spectra and replicates spectra. 9


                                                14
   The forward prediction mode for both the linear regression model and the multilayer per-
ceptron (MLP) has poor performance. The linear regression model is improved by 20% when
switching to using reverse mode prediction. Using bidirectional prediction mode improves re-
call@10 accuracy by 30% for both the linear regression and the multilayer perceptron model.
This finding suggests that the bidirectional prediction mode is more effective at capturing
the fragmentation events than the forward-only model.
   Figure 2 shows the improvement in spectral prediction for pentachlorobenzene using the
bidirectional MLP model. Note that the bidirectional model on the right more accurately
models intensities at larger m/z. The intensity peaks for larger m/z are critical for deter-
mining the identity of a molecule, and are more heavily weighted in Eq. (1).
   NEIMS achieves 91.7% recall@10 after applying a mass filter. The mass filter was set to
a tolerance of 5 Da of the query molecule’s mass; this reduces the size of the library to a
median of 6,696 spectra for each query molecule. In practice, this tolerance window could be
set to a larger window, depending on the uncertainty of the information about the molecular
mass of the ion. For the rest of this report, we will refer to the bidirectional multilayer
perceptron model with mass filtering of 5 Daltons as the default settings for NEIMS.
   From Figure 4b we see that while NEIMS has decent performance for recall levels of 10
and above compared to the NIST spectral library, it has considerably worse performance
for recall values of 1 and 5. This result is unsurprising given that the hyperparameters of
the model were trained to maximize performance on recall@10. As many experimentalists
will examine the top matches to find the library spectrum that best matches the sample’s
spectrum, we believe that tuning for recall@10 is sufficient for an initial approach.


Comparison to previously reported models

We next compared our model’s performance directly to the performance of the CFM-EI
model. 13 The setup of Allen et al. differs from our current setup in a few ways. First, they
evaluate their model on the NIST ’14 spectral library. Second, for the library matching


                                              15
task, their augmented reference library contains only spectra predicted by their model, and
none from the original NIST collection. Third, the cosine similarity metric Eq. (1) used
for evaluation in library matching in CFM-EI uses a different weighting scheme. In their
analysis, the cosine similarity is weighted by m0.5
                                                k instead of mk in order to de-emphasize the

larger peaks in the mass spectrum, as they ran their experiments on other data sets with a
higher proportion of larger molecules. 13
   To compare the performance of NEIMS to that of CFM-EI, we match their setup identi-
cally. We retrain our NEIMS model on the NIST 14 data set, and evaluate the performance
using the NIST 14 replicates as the query set. For library matching, we incorporate only
predicted spectra into our augmented library, and using the same modified similarity metric.

Table 1: Performance on Library matching task for NIST 17. * indicates that values were estimated
from Figure 4 of Allen et al. 13

             Model            Recall@1 (%)          Recall@10 (%)    Average run time (ms)
   NIST ’14 Reference Library      77                    99*                   –
            CFM-EI                42.6                   89*                300,000
            NEIMS                 54.3                   92.7                 0.47


   The library matching performance for CFM-EI and NEIMS are compared against the
NIST14 library for library matching performance are reported in Table 1. NEIMS performs
slightly better than CFM-EI on the library matching task. More importantly, NEIMS is
able to make spectral predictions orders of magnitude faster than CFM-EI. With NEIMS,
it would be possible to generate spectra for 1 million molecules in 90 min on a CPU, with
potential for considerable speedup with using GPU.


Distances between predicted and ground truth spectra

So far, we have evaluated the quality of the NEIMS predictions indirectly, by way of how they
affect library matching with an augmented library. Next, we assess the prediction accuracy
directly, by measuring the similarity (Eq. 1) between spectra in the NIST main library and
the model’s predictions. We refer to this similarity as the predicted similarity.

                                               16
Figure 5: Comparing the similarity between the predicted spectrum and the ground truth spectrum
to the overall similarity between spectra for the same molecule.


   There is inherent noise in mass spectra due to stochasticity of the underlying physical
process and also to experimental inconsistencies. 9 The NIST replicates library provides mul-
tiple spectra for each molecule, and we can use these sets of spectra to characterize the scale
of this noise for each molecule. Specifically, we define the inherent noise for a given molecule
as the average pairwise similarity between all corresponding spectra, in both the NIST main
library and the NIST replicates library, and refer to this as the overall similarity.
   For each molecule, we compute the ratio of the predicted similarity to overall similarity
as a normalized metric for the quality of our predictions. A ratio of 1.0 would suggest that
there are is limited available headroom for improvements using machine learning, since the
model’s errors are comparable to the variability in the data.
   Figure 5 shows the improvement in this ratio for the MLP bidirectional model over the
MLP forward model, confirming that the bidirectional model has better spectral prediction
performance. For the MLP bidirectional model, roughly half of the molecules have a pre-
dicted similarity to overall similarity ratio that is greater than 0.9, indicating that there is
potential for further improvement to the model. Some of these molecules have ratios that are
greater than 1, which is possible if there is more variation between the spectra (i.e. a lower
overall similarity) than between the predicted spectrum and the main library spectrum (i.e.



                                              17
predicted similarity).
   To analyze the ability of our model to extrapolate we analyzed the relationship between
predicted similarity and similarity of the query molecule to the training set molecules. The
molecules in the test set have limited structural similarity to the molecules in the training
set. We observe that 22.7% of molecules in the test set have a Tanimoto similarity of greater
than 0.8 with at least one molecule in the training set. A plot of this relationship between
predicted spectral similarity and closely related molecules in terms of Tanimoto similarity
can be found in Supplementary Figure 3. Based on these results, we believe that our model
is able to extrapolate to some areas of molecular space that were not fully covered by the
training set. Future work will examine the limitations of the model’s ability to extrapolate.



Conclusion

We demonstrate that NEIMS achieves high library matching performance on an augmented
spectral library containing predictions for molecules in the query set. The performance of
NEIMS is also slightly better than existing machine learning models for predicting EI-MS
spectra, with significant boost in speed of prediction.
   The high performance in library matching is attributable to the bidirectional prediction
mode. The reverse mode in particular allows the model to more accurately predict intensities
for larger fragments which result from the loss of small neutral subgroups. We observe that
the improvement in the library matching task also corresponds with improvement in the
similarity of the predicted spectra to the ground truth spectra.
   Several adjustments could be made to further improve the predictive accuracy of NEIMS.
For example, NEIMS currently does not have a method to model intensity peaks correspond-
ing to isotopes in ion fragments. If we were to train on spectral data with greater precision
in the peaks locations, we should be able to learn the exact identities of atoms based on the
decimal values of the m/z peak locations.



                                              18
   Mass filtering improved the performance of NEIMS by 6%. This suggests that for ex-
perimental setups where it is possible to know the molecular mass of the sample with some
accuracy, it is possible to improve the accuracy of matching on the augmented spectral li-
brary. It would also be interesting to explore other settings for mass filtering, such as filtering
out spectra which have a molecular mass that is much smaller than the position of the largest
m/z peak.
   Using graph-convolutional molecular representations, 39,40 especially bond-centered rep-
resentations 41 , would likely improve predictive accuracy at a slightly higher computational
cost. The predictions made from ECFP are limited by the descriptiveness of the fingerprint. 42
In particular, the overlap in representation for different molecular features represents a huge
limitation to the representation of the molecule.
   Combining NEIMS with transfer learning methods could allow for spectral prediction
specific to individual spectrometry machines. A library of such machine-specific spectra
would improve matching. 9
   The lightweight framework of NEIMS makes it possible to rapidly generate spectral
predictions for large numbers of molecular candidates. This collection of predicted spectra
can then be used directly in mass spectrometry software to expand the coverage of molecules
which can be identified by mass spectrometry. Because the requirements of NEIMS has
limited dependence to EI mass spectrometry, it likely that some of the principles used here
could be extended to other types of mass spectrometry.



Acknowledgments

We thank Stephen Stein and Laura Castellanos for fruitful discussions about mass spec-
trometry and for their helpful feedback on the manuscript. We thank Steven Kearnes for
his suggestions on the manuscript, and Lucy Colwell and Michael Brenner for their helpful
conversations.



                                                19
Supplementary information

The code for this work can be found at github.com/brain-research/deep-molecular-massspec.
   The supplementary information section contains peripheral findings on the relationship
between Tanimoto similarity and predicted spectra similarity, as well as the training and
test loss curves.



References

 (1) Hsieh, Y.; Korfmacher, W. A. Increasing speed and throughput when using HPLC-
     MS/MS systems for drug metabolism and pharmacokinetic screening. Current Drug
     Metabolism 2006, 7, 479–489.

 (2) Zhou, Z.; Zare, R. N. Personal information from latent fingerprints using desorption
     electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and machine learning. Analytical Chemistry
     2017, 89, 1369–1372, PMID: 28194988.

 (3) Petrie, S.; Bohme, D. K. Ions in space. Mass Spectrometry Reviews 2006, 26, 258–280.

 (4) Stein, S. E. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Mass Spectral
     Database. 2017.

 (5) Mclafferty, F. W. Wiley Registry of Mass Spectral Data, 11th ed.; John Wiley and Sons,
     2016.

 (6) Stein, S. E. Chemical substructure identification by mass spectral library searching.
     Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 1995, 6, 644–655.

 (7) Stein, S. E.; Scott, D. R. Optimization and testing of mass spectral library search al-
     gorithms for compound identification. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spec-
     trometry 1994, 5, 859–866.



                                            20
 (8) others,, et al. MassBank: A public repository for sharing mass spectral data for life
     sciences. Journal of mass spectrometry 2010, 45, 703–714.

 (9) Stein, S. Mass spectral reference libraries: an ever-expanding resource for chemical
     identification. Analytical Chemistry 2012, 84, 7274 – 7282.

(10) Bauer, C. A.; Grimme, S. How to compute electron ionization mass spectra from first
     principles. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2016, 120, 3755–3766.

(11) Grimme, S. Towards first principles calculation of electron impact mass spectra of
     molecules. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2013, 52, 6306–6312.

(12) Guerra, M.; Parente, F.; Indelicato, P.; Santos, J. P. Modified binary encounter Bethe
     model for electron-impact ionization. International Journal of Mass Spectrometry 2012,
     313, 1–7.

(13) Allen, F.; Pon, A.; Greiner, R.; Wishart, D. Computational prediction of electron ion-
     ization mass spectra to assist in GC/MS compound identification. Analytical chemistry
     2016, 88, 7689–7697.

(14) Viant, M. R.; Kurland, I. J.; Jones, M. R.; Dunn, W. B. How close are we to complete
     annotation of metabolomes? Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2017, 36, 64 – 69,
     Omics.

(15) Buchanan, B. G.; Feigenbaum, E. A. Readings in artificial intelligence; Elsevier, 1981;
     pp 313–322.

(16) Lindsay, R. K.; Buchanan, B. G.; Feigenbaum, E. A.; Lederberg, J. DENDRAL: a case
     study of the first expert system for scientific hypothesis formation. Artificial intelligence
     1993, 61, 209–261.

(17) Eng, J. K.; McCormack, A. L.; Yates, J. R. An approach to correlate tandem mass



                                               21
     spectral data of peptides with amino acid sequences in a protein database. Journal of
     the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 1994, 5, 976–989.

(18) Tran, N. H.; Zhang, X.; Xin, L.; Shan, B.; Li, M. De novo peptide sequencing by deep
     learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2017, 114, 8247–8252.

(19) Schoenholz, S. S.; Hackett, S.; Deming, L.; Melamud, E.; Jaitly, N.; McAllister, F.;
     O’Brien, J.; Dahl, G.; Bennett, B.; Dai, A. M.; Koller, D. Peptide-spectra matching
     from weak supervision. arXiv:1808.06576 2018,

(20) Dührkop, K.; Shen, H.; Meusel, M.; Rousu, J.; Böcker, S. Searching molecular structure
     databases with tandem mass spectra using CSI: FingerID. Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences 2015, 112, 12580–12585.

(21) Curry, B.; Rumelhart, D. E. MSnet: A neural network which classifies mass spectra.
     Tetrahedron Computer Methodology 1990, 3, 213–237.

(22) Rabinowitz, T. Mass-Spectrometry-Prediction. https://github.com/terryrabinowitz/Mass-
     Spectrometry-Prediction/blob/master/readme.pdf, 2017; [Online; accessed 06-Oct-
     2018].

(23) Lim, J.; Wong, J.; Wong, M. X.; Tan, L. H. E.; Chieu, H. L.; Choo, D.; Neo, N. K. N.
     Chemical structure elucidation from mass spectrometry by matching substructures.
     arXiv:1811.07886 2018,

(24) Lorquet, J. Whither the statistical theory of mass spectra? Mass Spectrometry Reviews
     1994, 13, 233–257.

(25) Lorquet, J.-C. Landmarks in the theory of mass spectra. International Journal of Mass
     Spectrometry 2000, 200, 43–56.

(26) Rosenstock, H. M.; Wallenstein, M.; Wahrhaftig, A.; Eyring, H. Absolute rate theory



                                             22
     for isolated systems and the mass spectra of polyatomic molecules. Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences 1952, 38, 667–678.

(27) Irikura, K. K. Ab initio computation of energy deposition during electron ionization of
     molecules. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2017, 121, 7751–7760.

(28) Ásgeirsson, V.; Bauer, C. A.; Grimme, S. Quantum chemical calculation of electron
     ionization mass spectra for general organic and inorganic molecules. Chem. Sci. 2017,
     8, 4879–4895.

(29) Linstrom, P. J.; Mallard, W. G. The NIST Chemistry WebBook: A chemical data
     resource on the internet. Journal of Chemical & Engineering Data 2001, 46, 1059–
     1063.

(30) McLafferty, F.; Hertel, R.; Villwock, R. Probability based matching of mass spectra.
     Rapid identification of specific compounds in mixtures. Journal of Mass Spectrometry
     1974, 9, 690–702.

(31) Hertz, H. S.; Hites, R. A.; Biemann, K. Identification of mass spectra by computer-
     searching a file of known spectra. Analytical Chemistry 1971, 43, 681–691.

(32) Moorthy, A. S.; Wallace, W. E.; Kearsley, A. J.; Tchekhovskoi, D. V.; Stein, S. E. Com-
     bining fragment-ion and neutral-loss matching during mass spectral library searching:
     A new general purpose algorithm applicable to illicit drug identification. Analytical
     chemistry 2017, 89, 13261–13268.

(33) RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics. http://www.rdkit.org, [Online; accessed 23-
     Sept-2018].

(34) Rogers, D.; Hahn, M. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. Journal of Chemical Infor-
     mation and Modeling 2010, 50, 742–754, PMID: 20426451.




                                            23
(35) Kingma, D.; Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv:1412.6980
     2014,

(36) Abadi, M. et al. TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning. 12th USENIX
     Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16). 2016; pp
     265–283.

(37) Golovin, D.; Solnik, B.; Moitra, S.; Kochanski, G.; Karro, J.; Sculley, D. Google vizier:
     A service for black-box optimization. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD Interna-
     tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 2017; pp 1487–1495.

(38) He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
     arXiv:1512.0338 2015,

(39) Duvenaud, D. K.; Maclaurin, D.; Iparraguirre, J.; Bombarell, R.; Hirzel, T.; Aspuru-
     Guzik, A.; Adams, R. P. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular
     fingerprints. 2015, 2224–2232.

(40) Gilmer, J.; Schoenholz, S. S.; Riley, P. F.; Vinyals, O.; Dahl, G. E. Neural message
     passing for quantum chemistry. arXiv:1704.0121 2017,

(41) Kearnes, S.; McCloskey, K.; Berndl, M.; Pande, V.; Riley, P. Molecular graph convolu-
     tions: moving beyond fingerprints. Journal of computer-aided molecular design 2016,
     30, 595–608.

(42) Landrum,       G.   Collding   bits.   2014;   http://rdkit.blogspot.com/2014/02/
     colliding-bits.html, [Online; accessed 11-Nov-2019].




                                              24
