                                              MIST-CF: Chemical formula inference from
                                                                      tandem mass spectra




arXiv:2307.08240v1 [q-bio.QM] 17 Jul 2023
                                             Samuel Goldman,†,∥ Jiayi Xin,‡,∥ Joules Provenzano,¶ and Connor W. Coley∗,¶,§

                                             †Computational and Systems Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
                                                                              Massachusetts 02139, USA
                                            ‡Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 999077, China
                                            ¶Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
                                                                              Massachusetts 02139, USA
                                             §Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
                                                                Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
                                                                                  ∥Equal contribution

                                                                                E-mail: *ccoley@mit.edu


                                                                                       Abstract

                                                    Chemical formula annotation for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data is the

                                                 first step toward structurally elucidating unknown metabolites. While great strides have

                                                 been made toward solving this problem, the current state-of-the-art method depends on

                                                 time-intensive, proprietary, and expert-parameterized fragmentation tree construction

                                                 and scoring. In this work we extend our previous spectrum Transformer methodology

                                                 into an energy based modeling framework, MIST-CF: Metabolite Inference with Spec-

                                                 trum Transformers for Chemical Formulae, for learning to rank chemical formula and

                                                 adduct assignments given an unannotated MS/MS spectrum. Importantly, MIST-CF

                                                 learns in a data dependent fashion using a Formula Transformer neural network archi-

                                                 tecture and circumvents the need for fragmentation tree construction. We train and

                                                                                            1
     evaluate our model on a large open-access database, showing an absolute improvement

     of 10% top 1 accuracy over other neural network architectures. We further validate our

     approach on the CASMI2022 challenge dataset, achieving nearly equivalent performance

     to the winning entry within the positive mode category without any manual curation

     or post-processing of our results. These results demonstrate an exciting strategy to

     more powerfully leverage MS2 fragment peaks for predicting MS1 precursor chemical

     formula with data driven learning.

Keywords: mass spectrometry, machine learning, metabolomics, graph neural networks,
chemical formulae



Introduction

The discovery of previously unknown small molecules in biological samples is rapidly expand-
ing our knowledge of plant chemistry, 1,2 cancer biology, 3,4 host-microbiome interactions, 5–7
and other metabolite-mediated human biology. 8 Similar small molecule discoveries in the
environmental sciences have led to new insights regarding the exposome and pollutant ef-
fects, resolving mysteries such as high salmon mortality rates. 9,10 Increasing our ability to
detect and identify the so-called “dark metabolome” with analytical chemistry techniques
represents an exciting opportunity in experimental and computational chemistry.
   Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is a particularly well-suited analytical technique
for this, as it allows for the high throughput characterization of small molecules from com-
plex mixtures. 11 In an MS/MS experiment, both an intact ionized mass (MS1) and a set
of fragment peak masses (MS2) can be measured for each unknown molecule. This frag-
mentation spectrum serves as a structural representation of the molecule, ideally allowing
the practitioner to match a small molecule structure to each resulting spectrum based upon
database spectra matches. Due to the vastness of chemical space, however, many observed
spectra have no precedent; in a large public MS/MS database, 87% of observed spectra
remain unannotated. 12

                                               2
   In such instances without spectral matches, we must rely on informatics and predictive
modeling to identify the likely molecular structure. This pipeline almost always begins by
inferring a chemical formula from the observed spectrum (Figure 1a). There are many for-
mula options for each observed MS1 value, especially for higher mass compounds. Specifying
the chemical formula (e.g., C6H12O6, C9H11NO3, etc.) constrains the space of potential com-
pound candidates to a set of isomers, whereas the MS1 alone only constrains the space of
candidates to those with similar masses. Automated assignment is far from trivial; while
the the maximum formula annotation accuracy was 94% in in the recent Critical Assessment
of Metabolite Identification in 2022 (CASMI20220), 13 the median score was 71%, and these
percentages were calculated only for the submitted predictions, rather than the total num-
ber of spectra tested. Improving the automated prediction accuracy of this step promises to
improve, simplify, and speed up downstream analyses.
   Chemical formula annotation tools can be grouped into two categories: database depen-
dent and database independent. Database dependent searches place restrictions on potential
formulae, querying the candidate mass and spectrum against databases including NIST, 14
GNPS, 15 HMDB, 16 or large compound libraries such as PubChem. 17 Relying on databases
inherently limits annotations to formulae that have already been observed. On the other
hand, database independent (de novo) chemical formula annotation considers all possible
chemical formulae, though the task becomes more challenging due to the larger number of
candidates. A recent bottom-up computational approach, BUDDY, 18 is a hybrid of the two
approaches and assigns database formulae to MS2 peaks and neutral losses. By combining
peak and neutral loss annotations, BUDDY generates potential candidates not present in
databases. However, overall annotation performance is a function both of how the candidate
space is defined and an algorithm’s ability to rank them; this limits our ability to perform a
direct comparison to or analysis of BUDDY. Herein we focus specifically on de novo formula
annotation for maximal flexibility using only MS/MS information.
   Notably, both MZMine 19,20 and SIRIUS 21–23 have developed widely used methods for


                                              3
scoring chemical formula candidates using MS/MS information for de novo annotation.
While MZMine evaluates each candidate formula based on the number of MS/MS peaks
it can explain, 20 SIRIUS scores them through a more expressive fragmentation tree strat-
egy. 21–23 SIRIUS first proposes candidate formulae through an exhaustive enumeration step
up to a certain mass error from the observed MS1, labels the MS2 peaks with potential
“subformulae” of the candidate MS1 annotation, performs an optimization to arrange these
subformula annotations into a fragmentation tree, and finally computes a likelihood of the
chemical formula based upon the tree and isotopic patterns. Despite their success and
widespread use, these methods offer room for improvement in terms of both accuracy and
speed. We recently observed program timeouts using SIRIUS for larger molecules (i.e.,
over 800 Da) during fragmentation tree calculations. 24 An additional, lesser appreciated
component of SIRIUS is that the method re-ranks candidate chemical formula based upon
compound scores in the structure annotation step; this phase implicitly reposes SIRIUS as
a database dependent search and led to a nearly 50% change in formula annotations in
our previous study. 24 It is unclear which pipeline steps lead to the high empirical formula
annotation rates and the extent to which the tree score can be improved.
   In this work, we present MIST-CF: Metabolite Inference with Spectrum Transformers
for Chemical Formulae, an energy-based modeling approach to improving the database-
independent, de novo chemical formula assignment step conditioned on both the MS1 mass
and MS/MS spectrum. We previously demonstrated that Formula Transformers can be used
to replace fragmentation tree kernels in the annotation step. 24 This study now demonstrates
that fragmentation trees can be replaced throughout the MS/MS processing pipeline for
equally accurate, fast, and robust predictions. As part of this, we develop a simple peak
subformula assignment routine, thus circumventing the need for fragmentation tree construc-
tion. We rigorously evaluate the performance of MIST-CF on two datasets: a public dataset
subset from the GNPS 15 we term NPLIB1 25,26 and a variant of NPLIB1 including spectra
from the commercial NIST20 dataset. 14 By training and evaluating our model both with and


                                             4
without data from NIST20, we enable reproducible evaluation of select trained models even
in the absence of a NIST20 license. MIST-CF achieves equivalent formula annotation accu-
racy on the positive mode CASMI2022 challenge spectra to the winning SIRIUS solution and
outperforms the out-of-the-box SIRIUS assignments by a margin of 18% . Altogether, this
demonstrates a path forward for replacing fragmentation trees in MS/MS data processing
with a fully integrated deep learning processing structure annotation pipeline.
   We release MIST-CF as an open source tool that can be easily integrated into existing
pipelines, with or without retraining, and is freely available under the MIT license at ref.
Zenodo 8151513 and https://github.com/samgoldman97/mist-cf.




                                             5
  a
                                                               MIST-CF


                                                                                                        C9H10O3                           HO                       O
                               MS/MS data
                               acquisition                           m/z
                                                                                                                                                         H2N       OH
                                                             MS/MS data                             Chemical formula                          Molecular structure


  b
                                                                                                        Candidate chemical formulae


      Unknown
                               MS1 Precusor                                              C9H8N2O2 + H+               C6H9FN2O3 + H+        C5H11N3O2P + H+
                               m/z: 177.0661
                                                                              C4H7FN5O2 + H+                 C7H12N3 + K+     C4H8FN5O2 - e-


   MS/MS spectrum
                        MS2
                                       Inten.
                      Spectrum
                                                    m/z                                                                       Model scoring


                      Ground truth                                                                MIST-CF                             SIRIUS
                     Formula: C9H8N2O2                                                  (Trained energy-based model)          (MAP parameter estimates)
                    Adduct Type: [M+H]+

                                                                                         C8H5O3
                                                                              C3H5O2      C 2H 2O
                                                                                                    Label MS2 subforms       Label MS2 subforms


  Cand.                        Score Rank                                              m/z
  C9H8N2O2 + H         +                                                   Formula transformer                                Fragmentation tree
                                98.7            1

                                                     TOP 3
                                                                               {CXHYNZ}
  C6H9FN2O3 + H            +
                                80.7            2

                                                             TOP 5
  C5H11N3O2P + H+               70.2            3
                                                                                                      MIST-CF score              Tree score
  C4H7FN5O2 + H+                68.5            4
                                                                                                                                                   P(T|D) = P(D|T)P(T)/P(D)
  C4H8FN5O2 - e-                58.5            5                                                    Score                                                 Score
  C7H12N3 + K+                  50.1            6



Figure 1: MIST-CF and SIRIUS both address the MS/MS chemical formula an-
notation problem. a. Input samples are first processed, recording a tandem mass spec-
trum. Before assigning full molecular structures, the chemical formula can first be inferred
to constrain structure assignment. b. Methodological similarities and differences between
MIST-CF and SIRIUS. A candidate precursor mass is first decomposed into plausible chem-
ical formulae and adduct pairs. MIST-CF (left) learns in a data-driven fashion to assign
scores and circumvents the need of fragmentation tree construction compared to SIRIUS
(right).




                                                                                              6
Methods

Preliminaries

In an MS/MS experiment, an input small molecule M is ionized, often by the addition of
an adduct (denoted by one-hot vector, A), measured, and fragmented in order to produce
an MS/MS spectrum S. The spectrum is composed of peaks that can each be represented
as mass, intensity pairs:


                      S := {(M (1) , I (1) ), (M (2) , I (2) ), . . . (M (|S|) , I (|S|) )}   (1)


Herein we consider only positively charged ions and peaks and assume that each fragment
carries only a single positive charge; m/z and mass are used interchangeably when describing
observed peaks.
   In addition to the observed MS/MS spectrum S, we also have access to the MS1 mea-
surements denoted as the precursor mass M . The core challenge of formula annotation is
to determine the chemical formula of M given M and S. We denote the target chemical
formula as a vector of integers, F .
   We represent the target chemical formula as a vector F , in which each index (F )j ∈ Z+
corresponds to the integer count for the observed j th element, where the parenthetical de-
notes an index into the vector. In total, we consider a set of common elements, “C”, “N”,
“P”, “O”, “S”, “Si”, “I”, “H”, “Cl”, “F”, “Br”, “B”, “Se”, “Fe”, “Co”, “As”, “Na”, and “K” for
formula vectors of size 18. We consider common positive mode adducts when generat-
ing chemical formula candidates: [M+H]+ , [M+Na]+ , [M-H2 O+H]+ , [M+NH4 ]+ , [M]+ , and
[M-2H2 O+H]+ . The adduct candidate is specified by a one-hot vector A. For de novo chem-
ical formula annotation, M can be decomposed into potential formula and adduct candidate
options exhaustively using a highly efficient dynamic programming algorithm 22 within small
1 to 5 parts-per-million (ppm) mass tolerances. The generated (formula, adduct) candi-



                                                       7
dates {(F (1) , A(1) ), (F (2) , A(2) ), (F (k) , A(k) )} can be further filtered based on presence in
a database or using various heuristics such as number of ring double bond equivalents if
desired. 27
    In addition to inferring the chemical formula for the full molecule, a step common to
SIRIUS fragmentation tree generation 21 and CSI:FingerID 28 is to derive corresponding sub-
formula annotations for the MS/MS peaks. In this way, a spectrum can be considered as a set
of (subformulae, intensity) pairings, in which the set of peak masses {M (1) , M (2) , . . . M (|S|) }
is replaced with a set of chemical formula vectors {f (1) , f (2) , . . . , f (Np ) }, where each chemical
formula is a subset of the precursor formula, i.e., f (j) ⊆ F ; peaks for which no formula can
be assigned are excluded from the list. Because the fragment peaks are also charged, the ob-
served masses are a summation of the mass of the subformula and its adduct. We define the
MS2 peak adduct for the ith peak a(i) , the mass of which must be subtracted when consid-
ering chemical formula assignment. The parts-per-million difference at each peak between
the adduct-adjusted peak mass and assigned subformula is referred to as ϵ(i) to indicate
measurement error.


Approaching chemical formula annotation with an energy based model

formulation

As exhaustive chemical formula candidate generation can be solved via dynamic program-
ming, 22 the key challenge in de novo formula annotation is to score how well each candidate
formula matches the observed MS1 and MS2 spectra. Taking a probabilistic lens and follow-
ing previous work in metabolomics and proteomics, 22,29 our goal is to learn the probability
of a candidate chemical formula and adduct, pθ (F (i) , A(i) |S, M ). We assume the MS1 is
useful only for candidate generation, and so the problem is simplified to approximating
pθ (F (i) , A(i) |S).
    Energy based models (EBM) are a probabilistic modeling framework drawing inspiration
from physics in which a probability distribution is defined by an energy function, Eθ . 30

                                                    8
Mathematically, EBMs take the form:


                                                       e−Eθ (x)
                                          pθ (x) =              ,                                             (2)
                                                        Z(θ)
                                  R
where the denominator Z(θ) =       x
                                       e−Eθ (x) dx is referred to as a partition function and serves
to normalize the energy to a valid probability, but is typically intractable to evaluate exactly.
EBMs have reemerged in recent years, with work across the chemical sciences for reaction
prediction, 31 retrosynthesis, 32 and scoring protein side-chain positions. 33 These models are
naturally suited for ranking applications. In our case, we factorize the probability of the
candidate formula conditioned on the spectrum as an EBM of the form:


                                                         eGθ (F (i) ,A(i) ,S)
                               pθ (F (i) , A(i) |S) =                         ,                               (3)
                                                              Z(θ)

where Gθ (F , A, S) defines an arbitrary neural network energy function that takes as input
the candidate formula, adduct, and full fragmentation spectrum. For any differentiable Gθ ,
the energy function can be learned via a softmax loss function, aggregated over minibatches,
and minimized via stochastic mini batch gradient descent:


                                                              eGθ (F (True) ,A(True) ,S)
          L(F (True) , A(True) , S) = − log                                 P                             ,   (4)
                                              eGθ (F (True) ,A(True) ,S) + K   k=1  e Gθ (F (k) ,A(k) ,S)


where {(F (k) , A(k) )}K
                       k=1 defines a set of “decoy” formulae for which Gθ will learn to assign

a low score. The trained model can be applied independently to each candidate formula at
inference time to yield a ranked list of assignments.
   Our approach is conceptually similar to SIRIUS, 21–23 but differs in that SIRIUS uses a
heuristic maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator to score fragmentation trees. This requires
manually setting parameters such as the frequency of observing various fragments in the
data. By using a flexible energy function trained via supervised learning, MIST-CF does not
require manual parametrizations nor necessitate fragmentation tree generation. SIRIUS also
allows for the incorporation of isotopic information from the MS1 to help identify chemical


                                                     9
formula candidates. We focus solely on the MS2-related score rather than isotopic MS1
information, as this can be subsequently added and is often excluded from entries in spectral
database such as the GNPS. 15


The MIST-CF architecture

MIST-CF parametrizes the energy function using a Chemical Formula Transformer 24 we
             (MIST)
denote as Gθ          (F , A, S). For the input (F , A, S), we first attempt to label each spectrum
peak (M (i) , I (i) ) with a plausible chemical subformula f (i) such that the spectrum can be
represented by a set of subformulae (i.e., f (1) , f (2) , . . . f (3) ). Peaks are sorted by intensity
and a maximum number, Np are retained, set to 20 by default. MIST-CF then subsequently
encodes these subformula peaks with a Chemical Formula Transformer, a Set Transformer
variant 34,35 we previously defined as part of the MIST architecture. 24 The full MIST-CF
pipeline is illustrated in Figure 1b, compared side-by-side to the SIRIUS model that requires
a fragmentation tree calculation. We review the exact structure of this model below by
describing each modeling step.


Subformula annotation The first step in scoring a candidate formula for a spectrum is
to assign a subformula to as many MS2 peaks as possible. We begin by subtracting the
precursor adduct mass from all mass values in the MS2. This approach assumes that the
subpeaks have the same adduct ionization as the precursor ion, but could be modified in
future iterations of MIST-CF. All possible subformulae are enumerated and filtered with
a ring double bond equivalent heuristic 27 to remove implausible formulae and generate a
candidate set {f (i) : f (i) ⊆ F , RDBE(f (i) ) ≥ 0}. The mass for each subformula is compared
to all adduct-adjusted spectrum masses and the peak masses are assigned their nearest
subformula match within a 15 ppm tolerance. An important contribution of this work with
respect to the original MIST model 24 is that this subformula assignment is now achieved
with a compact and open source NumPy 36 module, reducing the reliance on SIRIUS for high


                                                  10
quality MS2 subformula annotations.


Formula embeddings The subformula-annotated peaks are treated as integer vector in-
puts. Rather than pass these into a neural network directly, we first featurize each integer
vector count into a sinusoidal embedding vector 26,37 and concatenate the resulting output.
Briefly, each integer element count, v, in the input formula is encoded by our counts-based
encoder into the vector:

                                                                                            
                                          2πv                   2πv                   2πv
                    ReLU        sin                 , sin                 , sin                 ,... ,   (5)
                                           T1                    T2                    T3

where the periods (T1 , T2 , etc.) are set at increasing powers of two up to 256 to discrimi-
nate all possible element counts given in the input, and ReLU(·) is the rectified linear unit
activation function that results in only non-negative embeddings. All individual integer en-
codings within a formula are flattened and concatenated, leading to a full formula encoding
Enc(F ) ∈ R144+ .


Spectra context In addition to the encodings, the instrument type is considered as a
one-hot vector covariate distinguishing between Ion Trap, Q-ToF, Orbitrap, and FTICR
instruments. We denote this instrument type one-hot as c.


Transformer architecture Each peak subformula is first encoded into a hidden state
vector that is then passed into the Transformer, with the precursor formula included as a
special formula annotation f (0) := F . In addition to encoding the formula, we add additional
features for the formula difference between the MS1 formula and each MS2 formula candidate
vector (also converted into a sinusoidal embedding), a floating point scalar value for the
MS2 peak intensity (set to 1 for the MS1 precursor formula candidate), the observed mass
error between the observed adduct-adjusted mass and the monoisotopic mass of the MS2
subformula candidate (set to 0 for the MS1 precursor formula candidate), a one-hot encoding



                                                            11
for the adduct type (assumed to be the same within a single spectrum), the instrument type
one-hot vector, a Boolean flag set to 1 only at the precursor MS1 formula, and the number
of total annotated peaks with subformula. These representations are embedded into hidden
dimension d with a shallow single hidden layer MLP:


        h̃(i) = [Enc(f (i) ), Enc(F − f (i) ), I (i) , ϵ(i) I(f (i) ̸= F ), a(i) , c, I(f (i) = F ), Np ]   (6)

                                             h(i) = MLP(h̃(i) )                                             (7)

   A standard multi-head Transformer, with a slight modification to include featurized at-
tention between peaks as described previously in the MIST architecture, 24 is then used to
transform these peak representations into a score:


                   (MIST)                                                                   
                 Gθ         (F , A, S) = MLP Transformer [h(0) , h(1) , . . . h(Np ) ]                      (8)

The representation from the Transformer is pooled into a fixed length vector by selecting the
output representation at only the special h(0) position. Due to certain training set examples
not including MS1 masses, we take care to avoid inputting the relative mass difference
between the assigned precursor formula and MS1 mass which is artificially set to 0. This
helps avoid additional machine bias, as many of the training spectra have theoretical MS1
mass, rather than a measured MS1.


Model training All models are trained using the aforementioned loss calculated using
decoy formula. We sample minibatches of b spectra, where there are up to k = 32 decoys
sampled for each spectrum in the minibatch, resulting in a total of O(bk) candidate formula
encoded per batch. To sample the most plausible “hard” negative decoys in each batch, we
utilize a FastFilter module described in detail below. All models are implemented in Python
version 3.8 using PyTorch version 1.9 and PyTorch Lightning 38 version 1.6 and trained with
the Adam optimizer. 39 Hyperparameters are optimized with Ray Tune 40 version 2.0. Each


                                                       12
model was trained on a single NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU with training times taking under
3 hours of wall time.


Generating formula candidates

By default, MIST-CF utilizes the mass decomposition algorithm embedded within the SIR-
IUS software 23,41,42 (independent module from the rest of their pipeline) to decompose MS1
precursor masses into candidate formula options. We do not restrict the number of com-
mon elements C, N, O, or H. We set the maximum number of S and P atoms to 5 and 3,
respectively, and limit each halogen (i.e., F, Cl, Br, I) to a maximum of one per formula,
allowing for the recovery of 96% of formulae in the test set. This constraint can be changed
at inference time as desired. The chemical filter option “COMMON” is used to generate
formulae for energy-based model training, and the “RDBE” filter is applied during inference.
The default mass deviation is set to 10 ppm during training for all spectra. At inference, we
vary the ppm tolerance for different instrument types (Ion Trap: 15 ppm; Q-ToF: 10 ppm;
Orbitrap/FTICR: 5 ppm) as in BUDDY. 18 We utilize SIRIUS version 5.6.3.
   During inference, the user can choose to avoid this step in if they have their own, more
narrow list of potential formulae candidates (e.g., generated by database search, knowledge
about the chemical space being measured, or external tools such as BUDDY). In such cases,
the exhaustive formula candidate generation step can be skipped and MIST-CF’s energy
function can be used to directly evaluate the input candidate list.


Downselecting candidate formulae with a learned filter

Due to its energy-based formulation, the computational cost of MIST-CF scales linearly
with the number of candidate precursor formulae. The evaluation of each formula requires
assigning subformulae to peaks within a fragmentation spectrum, which is far faster than
inducing a tree structure over subformulae but not negligible. To limit the space of candidate
formulae, in addition to utilizingheuristics such as COMMON or RDBE as mentioned earlier,

                                             13
we train a data-driven filter we term FastFilter (Figure 2a) to further narrow the option set.
     (FF)
   Gθ       is a feedforward neural network that takes as input an encoded precursor formula
candidate, Enc(F ), and learns, in the same fashion as MIST-CF, to predict an energy value
based solely on the formula—not information about the spectrum—to approximate a non-
normalized likelihood pθ (F (i) |M ). Because no spectrum information is needed, we train a
single FastFilter model using a large database of molecules and chemical formulae extracted
from varous sources such as PubChem 17 and prepared by Duhrkop et al. 25 To avoid dataset
bleed, all chemical formulae that appear in spectral libraries used for model training/testing
                         (FF)
are excluded. We use Gθ         to select the top k candidates during inference (256 by default),
                                                      (MIST)
or decoys during training, to further score with Gθ            (F , A, S).


Datasets

We evaluate MIST-CF in terms of its ability to predict precursor chemical formulae for
MS/MS spectra from NPLIB1, a public natural products dataset extracted from the GNPS
database. 15 NPLIB1 is prepared as in Goldman et al. 26 and extracted from Duhrkop et al. 25
The dataset contains positive mode MS/MS spectra for compounds under 1,500 Da contain-
ing a predefined set of elements and adducts. In total NPLIB1 contains 10,709 spectra, 8,553
unique structures and 5,433 unique chemical formulae. We employ chemical formula splits
in which 10% of the 5,433 chemical formulae are selected randomly and added—with their
corresponding spectra—to the test set. 10% of the remaining data is used for validation and
early stopping.
   In addition to the public data, we use the commercial NIST20 library 14 to supplement
the training dataset. We extract all Orbitrap high resolution positive mode mass spectra
containing common elements and adducts. Examples with chemical formulae found in the
test set are excluded to avoid biasing the model. In total, the combined dataset has 45,838
unique spectra, 30,950 unique 2D molecular structures, and 15,315 unique chemical formula.
By using identical public test sets, we are able to report performance metrics with and


                                                14
without commercial library inclusion to enable replication studies and future methodological
improvements.


Baseline models

In addition to learning Gθ using the MIST architecture, we select three separate baseline
neural architectures: a feed forward network (FFN) inspired by MetFID 43 that acts on a
                                             (FFN)                                  (FFN)
binned representation of the spectrum, Gθ            ; ‘MS1 Only”, a variant of Gθ          in which
the binned spectrum is set to 0 for all spectra; and a Transformer model that utilizes mul-
                                                      (TF)
tiscale sinusoidal embeddings (Transformer), 44 Gθ           . These models are trained and hyper-
parameter optimized equivalently to MIST-CF. In the FFN baseline, the binned spectrum
representation is concatenated to the encoded MS1 candidate formula, the one-hot adduct
representation, and the context vector, then passed into a multilayer perceptron module.
The Transformer baseline concatenates the MS1 candidate formula encoding and context
vector to the sinusoidal embedding at each of the top 100 most intense peaks, along with
the intensity. An additional “cls” token is added to the peaks containing the mass of the
MS1 candidate and intensity of 2. These are subsequently passed into a set of multi-head
attention Transformer layers. The output is pooled at a special “cls” token. A single linear
layer then predicts a scalar energy value.




                                               15
Results

FastFilter limits the number of candidate formulae for MIST-CF

consideration with high precision

a                                                 b                                         c
      All cands.           Priortized cands.                                                               1.0
                                                          6000
 C9H8N2O2 + H      +
                           C9H8N2O2 + H   +
                                                                                                           0.8




                                                                                                Accuracy
 C6H9FN2O3 + H+            C6H9FN2O3 + H+                                                                  0.6

                                                  Count
                                                          4000
 C5H11N3O2P + H        +
                           C5H11N3O2P + H     +
                                                                                                           0.4
                                                          2000
 C4H7FN5O2 + H+            C4H7FN5O2 + H+                                                                  0.2

 C7H12N3 + K+              C7H12N3 + K+                                                                    0.0
                                                             0
    C4H8FN5O2 - e-         C4H8FN5O2 - e-                        1e0   1e2     1e4    1e6                        10 0     10 1    10 2   10 3
                                                                       |All cands.|                                     Top k filtered

Figure 2: Large numbers of formula candidates can be quickly filtered with a
simple feed forward neural network, FastFilter. a. Generated candidate formulae
for a spectrum can be prioritized with a learned model. A scalar score is generated for
each candidate formula given an MS1 value and mass tolerance via a feed forward neural
network. Only the top ranked formulae are selected for consideration with MIST-CF. b. The
distribution of the number of candidates for all recorded MS1 spectra in our spectra libraries
NPLIB1 and NIST20. All candidate chemical formulae are generated for all 6 adduct types
considered with an allowed mass deviation of 10 ppm. c. FastFilter model accuracy at
various top k cutoff values. The top formula is nearly always recovered within the top 256
candidates. The 95% confidence interval of the mean for recovery is shown across the 3
different formula splits considered in this work. All results are computed for a single trained
FastFilter model on a large database of biologically-relevant molecules.


A key limiting factor in de novo formula identification is the large size of the candidate space,
particularly for molecules with higher masses. We first quantify the size of the candidate
space. We process the full set of training spectra, including both NPLIB1 and NIST20,
into chemical formula candidates with the permissive RDBE filter. Over 15% of spectra
have greater than 5,000 formula candidates (Figure 2b). By training a light-weight model,
FastFilter, to predict how likely each formula is to appear in a biologically-relevant database
of small molecules, we are able to filter the candidates down to a smaller subset. We are
able to recover the true formula 99% of the time within the top 256 candidates (Figure
2c). This guarantees the computational tractability of the MIST-CF pipeline, as subformula
labeling would be prohibitively expensive for spectra with hundreds of thousands or millions

                                                                 16
of candidate formulae.


Chemical Formula Transformers provide meaningful representations

for formula annotation

        a                                                         Concatenate
                            Context,
           [M+H]+ C9H8N2O2
                                                     Assign & embed
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Attn.             Pooling                                             Linear
                                                      subformulae                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MIST-CF
                   Inten.                                                                                                                                                                            layers                                                                 layers                             score

                               m/z
        b
                                                         Encode                                                                                                                  Concatenate
                            Context,
                                                   Embed form / adduct
           [M+H]+ C9H8N2O2

                                                      Bin spectrum                                                                                                                                                                                                          MLP                                    FFN
                   Inten.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Layers                                 score

                               m/z
         c 1.0                                                      d                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MS1 Only
                  0.9                                                                    0.8                                                                                                                                              0.8                                                              FFN




 Top k accuracy                                                         Top 1 accuracy                                                                                                                                   Top 1 accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Transformer
                  0.8                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                              0.6                                                              MIST-CF


                  0.7                          MS1 Only                                  0.4                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                  MS1 Only
                                               FFN
                                                                                                                  FFN
                  0.6                          Transformer                               0.2                                                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                  Transformer
                                               MIST-CF
                                                                                                                  MIST-CF
                  0.5                                                                    0.0                                                                                                                                              0.0
                        0     2        4       6     8       10
                                                                                               [0, 200]
                                                                                                          [200, 300]   [300, 400]   [400, 500]   [500, 600]   [600, 700]   [700, 800]   [800, 900]    [900, 1000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [M+H]+   [M+Na]+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [M+H3N+H]+   [M-H2O+H]+   [M-H4O2+H]+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [M]+
                                           k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [M+K]+




                                                                                                                                    Mass bin                                                                                                                                Adduct


Figure 3: MIST-CF is a highly-effective architecture for learning to rank plausible
MS1 formula annotations a. The MIST-CF architecture uses the candidate chemical
formulae to generate subformulae and encode these with a Formula Transformer. b. The
baseline feed forward network (FFN) separately encodes the spectra and formula before
feeding their concenation into a multilayer perceptron (MLP). c. For all spectra in the test
set, the fraction recovered at various top k values for all methods is computed and shown.
d-e. The top 1 accuracy for the methods is grouped by the mass of the MS1 precursor
or adduct type. All results are computed for MIST-CF and the following baselines: MS1
only (a feed forward network utilizing only the chemical formula and context vector), a feed
forward network, and a Transformer. All results are computed over 3 random formula splits
and respective training runs as described in Methods, where the NIST20 is included in the
training sets. All spectra include up to 256 candidates to select from as selected with the
“COMMON” filter 23 and FastFilter. Error bars and shaded regions show 95% confidence
intervals of the mean.



                                                                                                                                                       17
We evaluated four different architectures for encoding spectra and formulae to determine
the best neural network architecture for the energy-based modeling framework described
in Methods. MIST-CF uses a Transformer model to convolve upon MS2 subformula with
context information concatenated to each formula (e.g., adduct, instrument type) (Figure
3a). We compare this model to a feed forward neural network (Figure 3b), a standard
Transformer applied to sinusoidal embeddings of each m/z value, 44 and a variant of the
feed forward network that does not embed the spectrum (“MS1 only”). Importantly, all
baseline neural network models are provided with the same context vectors, training set,
and hyperparameter optimization schemes to enable fair comparison.
   We find that MIST-CF outperforms all other architectures tested, likely due to its ability
to explicitly combine the representation of the spectrum and formula candidate, rather than
via intra-architecture concatenations (Figure 3b). We test the model by holding out a number
of spectra and chemical formulae from model training. For each test spectrum, up to 256
formula and adduct candidates are re-ranked by each model. MIST-CF outperforms the
next best model at top 1 accuracy by a 10% margin (Figure 3c; Table 1). Curiously, the feed
forward network and Transformer network show little difference from each other, indicating
that neural network architecture (i.e., FFN vs. Transformer) has less impact than the input
information provided to the model (i.e., subformula labels)—the main strength of MIST-CF.
All models are able to perform at least as well as the MS1 only model, consistent with our
intuition that the models are learning more than just database bias.
   All models decrease in accuracy as the masses of compounds increase (Figure 3d) due
to the growing number of plausible candidates. Similarly, models struggle on adducts that
appear less often in the training dataset, such as potassium adducts (Figure 3e). This is one
such area where manually parametrized models such as SIRIUS 23 may be better suited to
generalization. Data-driven methods such as MIST-CF are empirically better at correctly
retrieving formulae with common proton or sodium adducts.
   Integrating the higher quality Orbitrap training spectra from NIST20 leads to improved


                                             18
performance on the same test set. MIST-CF models trained on NPLIB1 alone achieve a
top 1 accuracy of 0.741 compared to a top 1 accuracy of 0.769 for models that train on the
NIST20 in addition (Table 1). This > 2% absolute improvement underscores that formula
prediction accuracy may be enhanced with the upcoming release of new spectral libraries
and higher quality data. 12

Table 1: MIST-CF outperforms comparable neural network baselines at chemical formula
annotation from MS/MS. Models were trained to predict held out NPLIB1 test examples
using training sets consisting of “NPLIB1” or “NPLIB1 + NIST20.” The best value in each
column is typeset in bold. Models were evaluated using three independent formula splits.
Values are shown ± standard errors of the mean.

 Training dataset                                        NPLIB1                                                                              NPLIB1 + NIST20
 Top k                    1                                  2                            3                                    1                    2                3
 MS1 Only           0.609 ± 0.002                    0.773 ± 0.003                0.833 ± 0.003                      0.623 ± 0.007            0.785 ± 0.008    0.847 ± 0.008
 FFN                0.635 ± 0.009                    0.786 ± 0.009                0.847 ± 0.007                      0.652 ± 0.006            0.804 ± 0.009    0.867 ± 0.008
 Transformer        0.639 ± 0.006                    0.791 ± 0.009                0.851 ± 0.006                      0.626 ± 0.014            0.772 ± 0.008    0.840 ± 0.011
 MIST-CF            0.741 ± 0.010                    0.878 ± 0.009                0.919 ± 0.007                      0.769 ± 0.006 0.897 ± 0.007               0.931 ± 0.005




                                  a 1.0                                                   b                1.0




                              Top k accuracy                                              Top 1 accuracy
                                               0.9                                                         0.9


                                               0.8
                                                                     Max peaks                             0.8
                                                                         1         15
                                                                         3         20
                                               0.7                       5         30                      0.7
                                                                         10        50

                                               0.6                                                         0.6
                                                     0   2       4       6    8     10                           0   10   20       30   40    50

                                                                     k                                               Max subpeaks

Figure 4: MS/MS subpeaks drive MIST-CF performance. a. The (sub)Formula
Transformer in MIST-CF operates on only the Np highest intensity MS2 peaks. Here, from
that set of labeled MS2 peaks, the number of peaks used as input to the spectrum is limited.
As the number of included peaks increases, the formula retrieval accuracy does too. b. The
top 1 retrieval accuracy is shown for all maximum subpeak numbers. All results are shown
for MIST-CF trained on the joint NPLIB1 and NIST20 dataset and tested on a single test
split of the data.


   One of the core methodological decisions in MIST-CF is the application of a Formula
Transformer to the set of labeled subformulae in the MS2 spectrum. To verify that these
peaks are informative for the model, we repeated benchmarking experiments for a single split


                                                                                         19
of the data, this time modulating the maximum number of peaks (rank-ordered by intensity)
viewable by MIST-CF.
   Model performance rapidly increases as the maximum number of included peaks increases,
sharply rising from 0.662 to 0.720 for 1 and 2 spectrum peaks respectively, where Np =
0 is functionally equivalent to the MS1 Only baseline with an accuracy of 0.623 (Table
1). There are diminishing returns of including lower intensity peaks, with 1, 5, 10, 20,
50 maximum formula peaks achieving top 1 accuracies of 0.673, 0.729, 0.754, 0.756, and
0.774 respectively (Figure 4). Making the model aware of a greater number of fragments
enables more generalizable and accurate predictions. This builds confidence that the model
is learning more than database biases, drawing information from even minor peaks to inform
predictions. As can be seen, the absolute difference in performance appears to level off
beyond 20 with only more marginal increases toward Np = 50. Given that the performance
benefit is marginal for many more peak annotations, we maintain our peak default Np = 20
unless otherwise stated to reduce the runtime of the method.




                                           20
MIST-CF compares favorably to existing formula annotation tools

 a                                         b                                           c                                                        d
                                                     0.0040                                       1.0
                 100%                                             Both methods
                                                     0.0035       MIST-CF only                                                                           >3   23 %     4%   2%      9%
                                                                                                  0.8
                 80%                                 0.0030




Num. predicted                                                                   Top k accuracy
                                                                                                                                           SIRIUS rank
                                                     0.0025                                                                                               3   4%       0%   0%      0%
                                                                                                  0.6


                                           Density
                 60%
                                                     0.0020

                 40%                                 0.0015                                       0.4                                                     2   9%       1%   0%      0%

                                                     0.0010
                 20%                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                            SIRIUS
                                                     0.0005                                                                                               1   45 %     2%   0%      1%
                                                                                                                            MIST-CF
                  0%                                 0.0000                                       0.0
                                                              0   500     1000                          0   2   4       6     8       10                       1       2     3      >3
                        SIRIUS   MIST-CF                          Mass                                              k                                                MIST-CF rank


Figure 5: MIST-CF more frequently assigns correct chemical formulae than the
SIRIUS formula assignment module on the NPLIB1 test set. a. The number
of spectra for which each method is able to predict a formula—regardless of accuracy. b.
The distribution of molecular masses for the spectra both methods are able to annotate—
regardless of accuracy— compared to the distribution of molecular masses for spectra on
which only MIST-CF succeeds. c. Top k accuracy for both methods is shown. d. The
rank at which each method is able to recover the true chemical formula. This visualization
highlights that there are many spectra for which MIST-CF achieves rank 1 that SIRIUS
does not predict in its top 3. MIST-CF models are trained on the joint NIST20 and NPLIB1
dataset. SIRIUS is executed with a compound and tree timeout of 300 seconds. All values
are shown for 3 random formula splits of the NPLIB1 data. Error bars and confidence
intervals show 95% confidence intervals for the standard error of the mean. Accuracy is
computed with respect to the total MS1 composition (i.e., summed adduct and formula) to
avoid biasing results against SIRIUS.


The widely used SIRIUS tool 23 is the de facto state of the art for the task of chemical formula
annotation. We therefore perform a head-to-head comparison of MIST-CF and SIRIUS on
the same NPLIB1 test set. Herein, MIST-CF considers all candidate MS1 formulae within
10 ppm of the recorded MS1 mass and utilizes FastFilter to down select to 256 candidates
for full evaluation. We run the SIRIUS formula module from the command line with tree
and compound timeouts of 300 seconds to avoid excessive execution times. With these
constraints, MIST-CF is able to predict a formula for every spectrum, whereas SIRIUS fails
for 10.77% of the spectra (Figure 5a). Failed spectra are associated with larger masses on
average (700.80 Da) than successful ones (378.06 Da).
                 Model accuracy is evaluated in terms of the summed elemental composition of the formula

                                                                                                  21
and adduct. SIRIUS does not distinguish tree scores with different adduct assignments as
we do in MIST-CF by design (e.g., [C6H12O6+H]+ and [C6H10O5+H-H2O]+ would appear
to have equivalent tree scores). On the NPLIB1 test set, MIST-CF successfully predicts
chemical formulae with a 71% top 1 accuracy, compared to SIRIUS’s 48% accuracy. This
represents a >20% improvement in absolute top 1 prediction accuracy (Figure 5c). On a
per-spectrum basis, SIRIUS rarely makes correct predictions MIST-CF does not, with a
total of approximately 3% of spectra falling into this category, whereas MIST-CF appears
to predict 36% of spectra correctly when SIRIUS cannot (Figure 5d).
   Beyond the improvement in accuracy, MIST-CF required approximately one-third the
wall time of SIRIUS (evaluated on compounds under 700 Da for which SIRIUS does not
time out) when both methods are run on a single CPU core (Supplementary Information).


 MIST-CF achieves competitive out-of-the-box performance on the

CASMI2022 challenge

We selected the dataset released as part of the Comparative Assessment of Small Molecule
Identifications 2022 (CASMI2022) 13 for additional validation. Our training datasets were
generated prior to the competition announcement, minimizing the risk of training dataset
bias and simulating a prospective use case. Herein, we focus only on the formula identification
challenge rather than the full task of structural elucidation.
   We extract all positive mode MS/MS files from the provided mzML files using MZMine
3 19 and apply both MIST-CF and SIRIUS to predict chemical formulae for each of the
extracted 304 spectra. Using our constraints on element types, 296 of the 304 formulae are
recoverable (97%), excluding species such as iodixanol (C35H44I6N6O15). We use an MS1
tolerance of 5 ppm.
   Model performance was evaluated on four key metrics: the accuracy of predicting formula
correctly, the accuracy of predicting the adduct correctly, and the accuracy of predicting the
total elemental composition of the formula and adduct combined. As discussed above, we

                                              22
use this last metric because evaluating the accuracy of the chemical formula alone would
bias the comparison for MIST-CF.
   We consider three variants of SIRIUS: SIRIUS, SIRIUS (CSI:FingerID) and SIRIUS
(Submission). SIRIUS (CSI:FingerID) provides formulae as re-ranked by their CSI:FingerID
score when searched against PubChem. SIRIUS (Submission) uses predictions submitted by
the SIRIUS authors at the latest competition under file name “duehrkop_CASMI2022.csv.”
This submission reportedly used a mix of ion identity molecular networking, 45 which can
be used to more accurately resolve adduct types, along with manual curation to improve
performance.
   Encouragingly, we find that MIST-CF is competitive with SIRIUS (Submission), achiev-
ing an equivalent collective joint formula and adduct accuracy of 0.868, despite our auto-
mated classification and no additional manual curation (Table 2). If evaluating SIRIUS
(Submission) on the subset of 272 spectra for which they submitted a prediction, a higher
accuracy is achieved compared to MIST-CF, as MIST-CF predicts all test set spectra. Nev-
ertheless, when using default parameters, MIST-CF reaches a top 1 formula accuracy of 0.822
(including adduct prediction) compared to an accuracy of 0.516 for SIRIUS (CSI:FingerID).
These results illustrate the competitiveness of MIST-CF and demonstrate that accurate,
prospective formula annotation does not require computing full fragmentation trees. In ad-
dition to testing our default MIST-CF model, we also test a variant with Np = 50 as a
comparison. Performance is equivalent for the joint accuracy of formula and adduct pairs.
However, accuracy in predicting the formula alone increases, as the model appears to be
marginally better at adduct assignment.



Conclusion

We have introduced a data-driven neural network model, MIST-CF, for inferring chemical
formulae from MS/MS spectra, trained using an energy-based modeling framework. We



                                            23
Table 2: Model accuracy of MIST-CF and SIRIUS evaluated on CASMI2022. “Accuracy
(F )” indicates accuracy of predicting the exact formula correctly. “Accuracy (A)” indicates
the fraction of spectra for which the first predicted (formula, adduct) pair includes the correct
adduct. “Accuracy (F + A)” indicates the fraction of spectra for which the total elemental
composition of the top predicted formula and adduct matches the elemental composition of
the summed true formula and adduct. “Predicted” indicates the number of spectra for which
a formula and adduct prediction was made. “SIRIUS” makes predictions with the default
command line tool described above; “SIRIUS (CSI:FingerID)” predicts formula, adduct pairs
using CSI:FingerID rankings against PubChem; SIRIUS (Submission) is taken directly from
the previous CASMI2022 results. MIST-CF (20 peaks) uses default 20 subformula peaks,
whereas MIST-CF (50 peaks) utilizes 50 subformula peaks. Accuracy (F ) and Accuracy
(A) are not reported for SIRIUS as these numbers are unfairly low due to how we break
ties between predictions with equivalent scores. All accuracies are reported for the top
1 prediction and divided by the total number of spectra (304), not the total number of
predicted spectra. Numbers typeset in bold indicate the best result in the column.

                Method                                Accuracy   Accuracy   Accuracy
                                                          (F )       (A)    (F + A)    Predicted
                SIRIUS version 5.6.3                         -          -      0.641        274
                SIRIUS version 5.6.3 (CSI:FingerID)      0.516      0.543      0.678        254
                SIRIUS (Submission)                     0.865       0.855     0.868         272
                MIST-CF (50 peaks)                       0.842     0.901       0.862        304
                MIST-CF (20 peaks)                       0.822      0.885     0.868         304



benchmark this model extensively to show how our recent Chemical Formula Transformer
architecture is uniquely suited to this task of integrating formula and spectra information.
MIST-CF outperforms other learning-to-rank neural network architectures and ties the win-
ning solution at the CASMI 2022 competition within the positive mode category, despite
using zero MS1 isotopic information or manual prediction refinement.
   This work defines a clear problem formulation for learning to rank MS1 candidate formula
from MS/MS data, including open source code and data splits. To address this task, we re-
lease open source and trained models with low memory and run-time concerns, even for large
molecules. In addition to these models, we develop a smaller and light-weight neural network
formula filtering model to help prioritize biologically-relevant chemical formula candidates.
This work continues to demonstrate the efficacy of our recent Chemical Formula Trans-
former network architecture in thorough benchmarking comparisons. 24 As part of this, we
have greatly simplified and improved the the Chemical Formula Transformer implementation


                                                      24
to now utilize custom formula embeddings, a simple and open source subformula assignment
routine (i.e., no longer fragmentation trees), additional model inputs such as instrument
type, and multiple adduct types. Applying these same changes to the Chemical Formula
Transformer architecture for fingerprint prediction is likely to yield similar improvements.
   There are many avenues for improving upon MIST-CF. We have trained models only for
positive-mode data; we do not directly address the integration of MIST-CF scores with MS1
isotopic scores; we do not consider adduct switching in MS2 subformula assignment; we still
rely upon SIRIUS’s algorithmic decomposition of exact masses into formula candidates due
to their fast implementation; and we have not yet explored the use of forward structure-to-
spectrum models 26,46 for data augmentation. There is also an opportunity to combine MIST-
CF with the recently reported BUDDY 18 by re-ranking formulae generated by BUDDY
rather than relying on the FastFilter.
   Altogether, we are optimistic about the potential to integrate this model into existing
pipelines for small molecule metabolite identification. By addressing the task of chemical
formula annotation, this work moves us one step closer to our vision of an integrated neural
network driven metabolite annotation pipeline.



Data and Software Availability

All code to replicate experiments, train new models, and load pre-trained models is available
at https://github.com/samgoldman97/mist-cf. The code to parse NIST can be found
in https://github.com/samgoldman97/nist-parser but this optional subset of training
data requires a license and cannot be shared publicly. The exact repository version used in
this work has been archived at Zenodo record 8151490 (data) and Zenodo record 8151513
(code).




                                             25
Authors’ contributions

S.G. and J.X. jointly wrote the software and conducted experiments. J.P. assisted with
CASMI2022 data processing and experiments. S.G., J.X., and C.W.C. conceptualized the
project, designed model components, and wrote the manuscript. C.W.C supervised the work.



Acknowledgement

The authors thank K. Duhrkop for helpful discussions around the SIRIUS method. S.G.
was supported by the MIT-Takeda Fellowship program and the Machine Learning for Phar-
maceutical Discovery and Synthesis consortium. J.P. was supported by the MIT-Accenture
Fellowship.



References

 (1) Pluskal, T.; Torrens-Spence, M. P.; Fallon, T. R.; De Abreu, A.; Shi, C. H.; Weng, J.-K.
     The biosynthetic origin of psychoactive kavalactones in kava. Nature plants 2019, 5,
     867–878.

 (2) Torrens-Spence, M. P.; Bobokalonova, A.; Carballo, V.; Glinkerman, C. M.; Pluskal, T.;
     Shen, A.; Weng, J.-K. PBS3 and EPS1 complete salicylic acid biosynthesis from iso-
     chorismate in Arabidopsis. Molecular plant 2019, 12, 1577–1586, ISBN: 1674-2052
     Publisher: Elsevier.

 (3) Cao, Y.; Oh, J.; Xue, M.; Huh, W. J.; Wang, J.; Gonzalez-Hernandez, J. A.; Rice, T. A.;
     Martin, A. L.; Song, D.; Crawford, J. M., et al. Commensal microbiota from patients
     with inflammatory bowel disease produce genotoxic metabolites. Science 2022, 378,
     eabm3233.

 (4) Dang, L.; White, D. W.; Gross, S.; Bennett, B. D.; Bittinger, M. A.; Driggers, E. M.;


                                             26
     Fantin, V. R.; Jang, H. G.; Jin, S.; Keenan, M. C., et al. Cancer-associated IDH1
     mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature 2009, 462, 739–744.

 (5) Quinn, R. A.; Melnik, A. V.; Vrbanac, A.; Fu, T.; Patras, K. A.; Christy, M. P.;
     Bodai, Z.; Belda-Ferre, P.; Tripathi, A.; Chung, L. K., et al. Global chemical effects of
     the microbiome include new bile-acid conjugations. Nature 2020, 579, 123–129.

 (6) Paik, D.; Yao, L.; Zhang, Y.; Bae, S.; D’Agostino, G. D.; Zhang, M.; Kim, E.; Fran-
     zosa, E. A.; Avila-Pacheco, J.; Bisanz, J. E., et al. Human gut bacteria produce TH17-
     modulating bile acid metabolites. Nature 2022, 603, 907–912.

 (7) Sato, Y.; Atarashi, K.; Plichta, D. R.; Arai, Y.; Sasajima, S.; Kearney, S. M.; Suda, W.;
     Takeshita, K.; Sasaki, T.; Okamoto, S., et al. Novel bile acid biosynthetic pathways are
     enriched in the microbiome of centenarians. Nature 2021, 599, 458–464.

 (8) Wishart, D. S. Metabolomics for Investigating Physiological and Pathophysiological
     Processes. Physiological Reviews 2019, 99, 1819–1875.

 (9) Bundy, J. G.; Davey, M. P.; Viant, M. R. Environmental metabolomics: a critical re-
     view and future perspectives. Metabolomics 2009, 5, 3–21, ISBN: 1573-3890 Publisher:
     Springer.

(10) Tian, Z.; Zhao, H.; Peter, K. T.; Gonzalez, M.; Wetzel, J.; Wu, C.; Hu, X.; Prat, J.;
     Mudrock, E.; Hettinger, R., et al. A ubiquitous tire rubber–derived chemical induces
     acute mortality in coho salmon. Science 2021, 371, 185–189.

(11) Neumann, S.; Böcker, S. Computational mass spectrometry for metabolomics: identifi-
     cation of metabolites and small molecules. Analytical and bioanalytical chemistry 2010,
     398, 2779–2788, ISBN: 1618-2650 Publisher: Springer.

(12) Bittremieux, W.; Wang, M.; Dorrestein, P. C. The critical role that spectral libraries
     play in capturing the metabolomics community knowledge. Metabolomics 2022, 18, 94.


                                             27
(13) CASMI, Critical Assessment of Small Molecule Identification. http://www.
     casmi-contest.org/2022/index.shtml, Accessed 2022-12-01.

(14) NIST, Tandem Mass Spectral Library. NIST 2020,

(15) Wang, M.; Carver, J. J.; Phelan, V. V.; Sanchez, L. M.; Garg, N.; Peng, Y.;
     Nguyen, D. D.; Watrous, J.; Kapono, C. A.; Luzzatto-Knaan, T. Sharing and commu-
     nity curation of mass spectrometry data with Global Natural Products Social Molecular
     Networking. Nature biotechnology 2016, 34, 828–837.

(16) Wishart, D. S.; Feunang, Y. D.; Marcu, A.; Guo, A. C.; Liang, K.; Vázquez-Fresno, R.;
     Sajed, T.; Johnson, D.; Li, C.; Karu, N., et al. HMDB 4.0: the human metabolome
     database for 2018. Nucleic acids research 2018, 46, D608–D617.

(17) Kim, S.; Thiessen, P. A.; Bolton, E. E.; Chen, J.; Fu, G.; Gindulyte, A.; Han, L.; He, J.;
     He, S.; Shoemaker, B. A. PubChem substance and compound databases. Nucleic Acids
     Research 2016, 44, D1202–D1213.

(18) Xing, S.; Shen, S.; Xu, B.; Li, X.; Huan, T. BUDDY: molecular formula discovery via
     bottom-up MS/MS interrogation. Nature Methods 2023, 1–10.

(19) Schmid, R.; Heuckeroth, S.; Korf, A.; Smirnov, A.; Myers, O.; Dyrlund, T. S.;
     Bushuiev, R.; Murray, K. J.; Hoffmann, N.; Lu, M., et al. Integrative analysis of multi-
     modal mass spectrometry data in MZmine 3. Nature biotechnology 2023, 41, 447–449.

(20) Pluskal, T.; Uehara, T.; Yanagida, M. Highly accurate chemical formula prediction
     tool utilizing high-resolution mass spectra, MS/MS fragmentation, heuristic rules, and
     isotope pattern matching. Analytical chemistry 2012, 84, 4396–4403.

(21) Böcker, S.; Dührkop, K. Fragmentation trees reloaded. Journal of cheminformatics
     2016, 8, 1–26.




                                              28
(22) Böcker, S.; Letzel, M. C.; Lipták, Z.; Pervukhin, A. SIRIUS: decomposing isotope
     patterns for metabolite identification. Bioinformatics 2009, 25, 218–224.

(23) Dührkop, K.; Fleischauer, M.; Ludwig, M.; Aksenov, A. A.; Melnik, A. V.; Meusel, M.;
     Dorrestein, P. C.; Rousu, J.; Böcker, S. SIRIUS 4: a rapid tool for turning tandem
     mass spectra into metabolite structure information. Nature Methods 2019, 16 .

(24) Goldman, S.; Wohlwend, J.; Stražar, M.; Haroush, G.; Xavier, R. J.; Coley, C. W. An-
     notating metabolite mass spectra with domain-inspired chemical formula transformers.
     bioRxiv 2022,

(25) Dührkop, K.; Nothias, L.-F.; Fleischauer, M.; Reher, R.; Ludwig, M.; Hoffmann, M. A.;
     Petras, D.; Gerwick, W. H.; Rousu, J.; Dorrestein, P. C. Systematic classification of un-
     known metabolites using high-resolution fragmentation mass spectra. Nature Biotech-
     nology 2021, 39, 462–471.

(26) Goldman, S.; Bradshaw, J.; Xin, J.; Coley, C. W. Prefix-tree Decoding for Predicting
     Mass Spectra from Molecules. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06470 2023,

(27) Pretsch, E.; Bühlmann, P.; Affolter, C.; Pretsch, E.; Bhuhlmann, P.; Affolter, C. Struc-
     ture determination of organic compounds; Springer, 2000.

(28) Dührkop, K.; Shen, H.; Meusel, M.; Rousu, J.; Böcker, S. Searching molecular structure
     databases with tandem mass spectra using CSI:FingerID. Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences 2015, 112, 12580–12585.

(29) Zhang, N.; Aebersold, R.; Schwikowski, B. ProbID: a probabilistic algorithm to iden-
     tify peptides through sequence database searching using tandem mass spectral data.
     Proteomics 2002, 2, 1406–1412.

(30) LeCun, Y.; Chopra, S.; Hadsell, R.; Ranzato, M.; Huang, F. A tutorial on energy-based
     learning. Predicting structured data 2006, 1 .


                                             29
(31) Lin, M. H.; Tu, Z.; Coley, C. W. Improving the performance of models for one-step
     retrosynthesis through re-ranking. Journal of cheminformatics 2022, 14, 1–13.

(32) Sun, R.; Dai, H.; Li, L.; Kearnes, S.; Dai, B. Energy-based view of retrosynthesis. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2007.13437 2020,

(33) Du, Y.; Meier, J.; Ma, J.; Fergus, R.; Rives, A. Energy-based models for atomic-
     resolution protein conformations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13167 2020,

(34) Ying, C.; Cai, T.; Luo, S.; Zheng, S.; Ke, G.; He, D.; Shen, Y.; Liu, T.-Y. Do Transform-
     ers Really Perform Bad for Graph Representation? Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems 34. 2021; pp 28877–28888.

(35) Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, L.;
     Polosukhin, I. Attention Is All You Need. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems 30. 2017; pp 5998–6008.

(36) Harris, C. R.; Millman, K. J.; Van Der Walt, S. J.; Gommers, R.; Virtanen, P.; Cour-
     napeau, D.; Wieser, E.; Taylor, J.; Berg, S.; Smith, N. J., et al. Array programming
     with NumPy. Nature 2020, 585, 357–362.

(37) Tancik, M.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Mildenhall, B.; Fridovich-Keil, S.; Raghavan, N.; Sing-
     hal, U.; Ramamoorthi, R.; Barron, J. T.; Ng, R. Fourier Features Let Networks Learn
     High Frequency Functions in Low Dimensional Domains. Advances in Neural Informa-
     tion Processing Systems 33. 2020; pp 7537–7547.

(38) Falcon, W.; The PyTorch Lightning team, PyTorch Lightning. 2019; https://github.
     com/Lightning-AI/lightning.

(39) Kingma, D. P.; Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1412.6980 2014,




                                             30
(40) Liaw, R.; Liang, E.; Nishihara, R.; Moritz, P.; Gonzalez, J. E.; Stoica, I. Tune: A
     research platform for distributed model selection and training. ICML 2018 AutoML
     Workshop 2018,

(41) Bocker, S.; Lipták, Z. A fast and simple algorithm for the Money Changing Problem.
     Algorithmica 2007, 48, 413–432.

(42) Dührkop, K.; Ludwig, M.; Meusel, M.; Böcker, S. Faster mass decomposition. Algo-
     rithms in Bioinformatics: 13th International Workshop, WABI 2013, Sophia Antipolis,
     France, September 2-4, 2013. Proceedings 13. 2013; pp 45–58.

(43) Fan, Z.; Alley, A.; Ghaffari, K.; Ressom, H. W. MetFID: artificial neural network-
     based compound fingerprint prediction for metabolite annotation. Metabolomics 2020,
     16, 104.

(44) Voronov, G.; Lightheart, R.; Davison, J.; Krettler, C. A.; Healey, D.; Butler, T. Multi-
     scale Sinusoidal Embeddings Enable Learning on High Resolution Mass Spectrometry
     Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02980 2022,

(45) Schmid, R.; Petras, D.; Nothias, L.-F.; Wang, M.; Aron, A. T.; Jagels, A.; Tsugawa, H.;
     Rainer, J.; Garcia-Aloy, M.; Dührkop, K., et al. Ion identity molecular networking for
     mass spectrometry-based metabolomics in the GNPS environment. Nature communi-
     cations 2021, 12, 3832.

(46) Goldman, S.; Li, J.; Coley, C. W. Generating Molecular Fragmentation Graphs with
     Autoregressive Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13136 2023,




                                             31
                                                                 Supporting Information:
                                              MIST-CF: Chemical formula inference from
                                                                   tandem mass spectra




arXiv:2307.08240v1 [q-bio.QM] 17 Jul 2023
                                             Samuel Goldman,†,∥ Jiayi Xin,‡,∥ Joules Provenzano,¶ and Connor W. Coley∗,¶,§

                                               †Computational and Systems Biology, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
                                            ‡Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 999077, China
                                              ¶Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
                                                 §Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge,
                                                                          Massachusetts 02139, USA
                                                                              ∥Equal contribution

                                                                            E-mail: *ccoley@mit.edu




                                                                                     S-1
Supporting Information Available

S1   SIRIUS configuration

SIRIUS version 5.6.3 S1 is used as a baseline throughout the work. For consistency, we
utilize a 300 second (5 minute) timeout for each compound and set equivalent adducts and
formula as used in MIST-CF. An example call signature using our parameters, as we use in
CASMI2022 is shown in Listing 1.

Listing 1: An example call to SIRIUS for annotating the formula for an input MGF file,
$INPUT_MGF
$SIRIUS_PATH          \

     -- cores $CORES \

     -- output        $OUTFOLDER1 \

     -- input $INPUT_MGF \

     formula      \

     -i " [ M + H ]+ ,[ M + K ]+ ,[ M + Na ]+ ,[ M +H - H2O ]+ ,[ M +H - H4O2 ]+ ,[ M + NH4 ]+ ,[ M ]+ " \

     -e " C [0 -] N [0 -] O [0 -] H [0 -] S [0 -5] P [0 -3] I [0 -1] Cl [0 -1] F [0 -1] Br [0 -1] " \

     -- ppm - max 5.0 \

     -- tree - timeout 300 \

     -- compound - timeout 300 \

     fingerprint \

     structure \

     write - summaries \

     -- output $OUTFOLDER2




S2   Timing experiments

To demonstrate that MIST-CF has reasonable runtime properties, we conduct a simple
timed experiment. 10 random sample test set spectra under 700 Da from the NPLIB1


                                                  S-2
were selected and set aside in an MGF file. Using the command line call signature for
formula prediction on a Linux workstation, we test the wall time to predict formula for these
spectra with all pre-specified elements, a maximum ppm of 10 from the MS1, and all adduct
possibilities considered within MIST-CF. We repeat the same procedure for SIRIUS, using
a compound and tree timeout of 1 minute to avoid excessively large times. We conduct
these experiments using only 1 CPU core. We find that in three separate trials, MIST-CF
completed in 39.31 ± 0.49 seconds (mean ± standard error of the mean), whereas SIRIUS
completed in 112.61 ± 0.21 seconds (mean ± standard error of the mean).


S3   Hyperparameter setting

To enable fair comparison across models, hyperparameters were tuned for MIST-CF, the FFN
binned prediction baseline, the transformer binned prediction baseline, and the FastFilter
model. Parameters were tuned using RayTune S2 with Optuna S3 and an ASHAScheduler.
Each model was allotted 50 different hyperoptimization trials for fitting. MIST-CF, the
FFN baseline, and the Transformer baseline were hyperparameter optimized on a smaller
10, 000 spectra subset of the combined NPLIB1 and NIST20 datasets. MIST-CF was hy-
perparameter optimized using a maximum of 10 peaks per spectrum. The FastFilter model
was hyperparameter optimized directly on the biological molecules dataset. Parameters are
listed in Table S1.




                                            S-3
Table S1: Hyperparameter settings for MIST-CF, FFN, Transformer, and the FastFilter
model to select batches of chemical formula.


 Model         Parameter                        Grid                             Value
 MIST-CF       Learning rate                    [1e-4, 1e-3]                     0.00045
               Learning rate decay fraction     [0.7, 1.0]                       0.8830
               Weight decay                     {1e-6, 1e-7, 0.0}                0.0
               Hidden size                      {32, 64, 128, 256}               128
               Dropout                          [0, 0.5]                         0.1
               Number of layers                 [1, 2, 3, 4]                     2
               Batch size                       {4, 8, 16}                       4
 FFN           Number of bins                   {1000, 2000, 3000, ..., 10000}   5000
               Learning rate                    [1e-4, 1e-3]                     0.0005
               Learning rate decay fraction     [0.7, 1.0]                       0.8477
               Weight decay                     {1e-6, 1e-7, 0.0}                0
               Hidden size                      {32, 64, 128, 256, 512}          512
               Dropout                          [0, 0.5]                         0.4
               Number of layers                 {1, 2, 3, 4}                     4
               Batch size                       {16, 32, 64}                     64
 Transformer Learning rate                      [1e-4, 1e-3]                     0.00025
             Learning rate decay fraction       [0.7, 1.0]                       0.8601
             Weight decay                       {1e-6, 1e-7, 0.0}                1e-7
             Hidden size                        {32, 64, 128, 256, 512}          32
             Dropout                            [0, 0.5]                         0.2
             Number of layers                   {1, 2, 3, 4}                     2
             Batch size                         {8, 16}                          8
 FastFilter    Learning rate                    [1e-4, 1e-3]                     0.0003
               Learning rate decay fraction     [0.7, 1.0]                       0.8642
               Weight decay                     {1e-6, 1e-7, 0.0}                0
               Hidden size                      {32, 64, 128, 256, 512}          256
               Dropout                          [0, 0.5]                         0.1
               Number of layers                 {1, 2, 3, 4}                     3
               Batch size                       {16, 32, 64}                     64




References

(S1) Dührkop, K.; Fleischauer, M.; Ludwig, M.; Aksenov, A. A.; Melnik, A. V.; Meusel, M.;
     Dorrestein, P. C.; Rousu, J.; Böcker, S. SIRIUS 4: a rapid tool for turning tandem

                                              S-4
     mass spectra into metabolite structure information. Nature Methods 2019, 16 .

(S2) Liaw, R.; Liang, E.; Nishihara, R.; Moritz, P.; Gonzalez, J. E.; Stoica, I. Tune: A
     research platform for distributed model selection and training. ICML 2018 AutoML
     Workshop 2018,

(S3) Akiba, T.; Sano, S.; Yanase, T.; Ohta, T.; Koyama, M. Optuna: A next-generation
     hyperparameter optimization framework. Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD in-
     ternational conference on knowledge discovery & data mining. 2019; pp 2623–2631.




                                          S-5
