                                                         Efficiently predicting high resolution mass spectra
                                                                     with graph neural networks

                                                           Michael Murphy1∗                    Stefanie Jegelka1            Ernest Fraenkel1
                                                          murphy17@mit.edu                     stefje@mit.edu              fraenkel@mit.edu
                                                                 Tobias Kind2                                       David Healey2




arXiv:2301.11419v1 [cs.LG] 26 Jan 2023
                                                          tobias.kind@envedabio.com                          david.healey@envedabio.com
                                                                                          Thomas Butler2
                                                                                     tom.butler@envedabio.com

                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                     MIT
                                                                                           2
                                                                                               Enveda Biosciences

                                                                                               January 26, 2023

                                                                                                   Abstract
                                                Identifying a small molecule from its mass spectrum is the primary open problem in computational
                                                metabolomics. This is typically cast as information retrieval: an unknown spectrum is matched against
                                                spectra predicted computationally from a large database of chemical structures. However, current
                                                approaches to spectrum prediction model the output space in ways that force a tradeoff between capturing
                                                high resolution mass information and tractable learning. We resolve this tradeoff by casting spectrum
                                                prediction as a mapping from an input molecular graph to a probability distribution over molecular
                                                formulas. We discover that a large corpus of mass spectra can be closely approximated using a fixed
                                                vocabulary constituting only 2% of all observed formulas. This enables efficient spectrum prediction using
                                                an architecture similar to graph classification – GrAFF-MS – achieving significantly lower prediction
                                                error and orders-of-magnitude faster runtime than state-of-the-art methods.


                                         1      Introduction
                                         The identification of unknown small molecules in complex chemical mixtures is a primary challenge in
                                         many areas of chemical and biological science. The standard high-throughput approach to small molecule
                                         identification is tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), with diverse applications including metabolomics [1],
                                         drug discovery [2], clinical diagnostics [3], forensics [4], and environmental monitoring [5].
                                         The key bottleneck in MS/MS is structural elucidation: given a mass spectrum, we must determine the 2D
                                         structure of the molecule it represents. This problem is far from solved, and adversely impacts all areas
                                         of science that use MS/MS. Typically only 2−4% of spectra are identified in untargeted metabolomics
                                         experiments [6], and a recent competition saw no more than 30% accuracy [7].
                                         Because MS/MS is a lossy measurement, and existing training sets are small, direct prediction of structures
                                         from spectra is particularly challenging. Therefore the most common approach is spectral library search, which
                                         casts the problem as information retrieval [8]: an observed spectrum is queried against a library of spectra with
                                         known structures. This provides an informative prior, and has the advantage of easy interpretability as the
                                         entire space of solutions is known. As there are relatively few (104 ) small molecules with known experimental
                                             ∗ The lead author carried out this work as an intern at Enveda Biosciences.




                                                                                                         1
mass spectra, in spectral library search it is necessary to augment libraries with spectra predicted from large
databases (106 − 109 ) of molecular graphs. This motivates the problem of spectrum prediction.
Spectrum prediction is actively studied in metabolomics and quantum chemistry [9], yet has received little
attention from the machine learning community. A major challenge in spectrum prediction is modelling of
the output space: a mass spectrum is a variable-length set of real-valued (m/z, height) tuples, which is not
straightforward to represent as an output of a deep learning model. The m/z coordinate (mass-to-charge
ratio) poses particular difficulty: it must be predicted with high precision, as a key strength of MS/MS is the
ability to distinguish fractional m/z differences on the order of 10−6 representative of different elemental
composition.
Existing approaches to spectrum prediction force a tradeoff between capturing high-resolution m/z information
and tractability of the learning problem. Mass-binning methods [10, 11, 12] represent a spectrum as a fixed-
length vector by discretizing the m/z axis at regular intervals, discarding valuable information in favor
of tractable learning. Bond-breaking methods [13, 14] achieve perfect m/z resolution, but do so through
expensive combinatorial enumeration of substructures.
This work makes the following contributions:
    • We formulate spectrum prediction as a mapping from a molecular graph to a probability distribution
      over molecular formulas, allowing full resolution predictions without enumerating substructures;
    • We discover most mass spectra can be effectively approximated with a small fixed vocabulary of
      molecular formulas, bypassing the tradeoff between m/z resolution and tractable learning; and
    • We implement an efficient graph neural network architecture, GrAFF-MS, that substantially out-
      performs state-of-the-art in both prediction error and runtime on two canonical mass spectrometry
      datasets.


2     Background
2.1    Definitions
We denote vectors x in bold lowercase and matrices X in bold uppercase.
A molecular graph G = (V, E, a, b) is a minimal description of the structure of a molecule: comprising an
undirected graph with node set V , edge set E ⊂ V × V , node labels a ∈ [118]V indicating atom number, and
edge labels b ∈ ({1, 1.5, 2, 3} × {−1, 0, 1})E indicating bond order and chirality.
A molecular formula f (e.g. C8 H10 N4 O2 ) describes a multiset of atoms, which we encode as a nonnegative
                                     .
integer vector of atom counts in F ∗ = Z118
                                        + . Formulas may be added and subtracted from one another, and
inequalities between formulas are taken to hold elementwise. We reserve the symbol P to indicate a formula
                                                            .
of a precursor ion. The subformulas of P are the set F(P ) = {f ∈ F ∗ : f ≤ P }.
hµ, f i ∈ R+ is the theoretical mass of a molecule with formula f , with units of daltons (Da): this is a linear
combination of the monoisotopic masses of the elements of the periodic table, µ ∈ R118  + , with multiplicities
given by f .
A mass spectrum S is a variable-length set of peaks, each of which is a (m/z, height) tuple (mi , yi ) ∈ R2+ . We
use the notation i ∈ S to index peaks inPa spectrum. We assume spectra are normalized, permitting us to
treat them as probability distributions: i∈S yi = 1. A mass spectrum is implicitly always accompanied by a
precursor formula P .
                              .
We always assume charge z = 1, as it is rare for small molecules to acquire more than a single charge.

2.2    Tandem mass spectrometry
A tandem mass spectrometer is a scientific instrument that generates high-throughput experimental signatures
of the molecules present in a complex mixture. It works by ionizing a chemical sample into a jet of electrically-


                                                       2
charged gas. This gas is electromagnetically filtered to select a population of precursor ions of a specific
mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) representing a unique molecular structure. Each precursor ion is fragmented by
collision with molecules of an inert gas. If a collision occurs with sufficient energy, one or more bonds in the
precursor will break, yielding a charged product ion and one or more uncharged neutral loss molecules. The
product ion is measured by a detector, which records its m/z up to a small measurement error proportional to
the m/z times the instrument resolution . This process is repeated for large numbers of identical precursor
ions, building up a histogram indexed by m/z. Local maxima in this histogram are termed peaks: ideally,
each peak represents a unique product ion, with height reflecting its probability of formation. This set of
peaks constitutes the mass spectrum. A typical mass spectrometry experiment acquires mass spectra for tens
of thousands of distinct precursors in this manner, with m/zs measured at resolution on the order of 10−6 .
This process is depicted in Figure 1A; we illustrate the relationship between precursor ion, product ion, and
neutral loss in Figure 1B.




Figure 1: (A) The workflow of tandem mass spectrometry. A chemical mixture is ionized and filtered to
isolate precursor ions of m/z = M ; these are fragmented into product ions (red) and neutral losses (blue),
and a detector yields a histogram of product ions indexed by m/z, with measurement error proportional to
m/z. (B) An example fragmentation of a precursor ion with formula C8 H11 N4 O2 . Fragmentation breaks
bonds, cutting the molecular graph into connected components. The component retaining the charge is the
product ion; its complement is the neutral loss. The peak at m/z = m represents the product ion; given the
precursor formula, we can equally specify this peak by its formula C3 H4 NO2 , or the formula of its neutral
loss C5 H7 N3 .



2.3    Structural elucidation
A tandem mass spectrum of a molecule contains substantial information about its 2D structure. Peak heights
reflect the propensity of different bonds to break: this can reveal structural differences in compounds, even if
they have the same molecular formula. Furthermore, the O(10−6 ) resolution of modern MS/MS can detect
small characteristic deviations from integrality in the masses of individual chemical elements that arise from
nuclear physics, allowing detailed information about the molecular formula to be inferred from the spectrum
with high accuracy (Sec 2.4).
The task of inferring a 2D structure from a mass spectrum, structural elucidation, is the major open problem


                                                       3
in computational metabolomics, dating back to the 1960s in one of the earliest examples of an expert system
[15]. Yet structural elucidation remains far from solved: despite half a century of research, algorithmic
approaches perform only marginally better than manual annotations by expert chemists, with no method
submitted to the 2022 Critical Analysis of Small Molecule Identification (CASMI) challenge exceeding 30%
accuracy [7].
The difficulty of structural elucidation has broad scientific implications: while a modern metabolomics
experiment routinely detects tens of thousands of spectra, usually only a few percent of these are confidently
annotated with a structure [6]. Spectral library search, described in the introduction, is the approach to
structural elucidation preferred in practice by most biologists and chemists [8], and is a standard component
of existing metabolomics workflows. The availability of high-quality predicted spectra across large chemical
structure databases would therefore greatly increase compound identification rates in real experimental
settings.

2.4     Mass decomposition
Modern mass spectrometry achieves sufficiently high resolution to detect small deviations in m/z from
integrality that are characteristic of different chemical elements. This property is a key strength of the
technology, because it permits annotating peaks with formulas through mass decomposition [16]. Given a
product ion of m/z = m, a precursor formula P , and an instrument resolution , product mass decomposition
yields a set F(P, m, ) of chemically plausible subformulas of P whose theoretical masses lie within measurement
error m of m. This can be cast as an integer program, in which all solutions of the following minimization
with cost ≤ m are enumerated:

                                                     min |hµ, f i − m|                                                      (1)
                                                    f ∈F ∗

                                                      s.t. f ≤ P, f ∈ Ω                                                     (2)

where Ω describes a general set of constraints that exclude unrealistic molecular formulas [17]. In practice,
with modern instruments  is sufficiently small for there to typically be only one or a few solutions to this
optimization. This allows us to later rely on product mass decomposition as a black-box to generate useful
formula annotations at training time.


3     Related work
Bond-breaking, used in [13, 14, 18], solves the problem of representing the output space by enumerating the
2D structures of all probable product ions. These are taken to be connected subgraphs of the precursor,
generated by sequences of edge removals. Each product ion structure is scored for its probability of formation,
and a spectrum is generated by associating this probability with each structure’s theoretical m/z. Bond-
breaking therefore achieves perfect m/z resolution, but suffers from two major weaknesses: first, enumerating
substructures scales poorly with molecule size, and is not conducive to massively-parallel implementation on
a GPU. We found a state-of-the-art method [13] takes ∼5s on average to predict a single mass spectrum,
which precludes training on the largest available datasets: using the same settings as its authors, training
[13] on ∼300k spectra in NIST-20 would take an estimated three months on a 64-core machine. It also poses
serious limitations at test time, as inference with a large-scale structure database like ChEMBL [19] requires
predicting millions of spectra. The other weakness of bond-breaking arises from a restrictive modelling
assumption: rearrangement reactions [20] frequently yield product ions that are not reachable from the
precursor by sequences of edge removals.1
Mass-binning is used for spectrum prediction by [10], and subsequently employed in recent preprints [11, 12].
This approach represents a mass spectrum as a fixed-length vector via discretization: the m/z axis is
partitioned into narrow regularly-spaced bins, and each bin is assigned the sum of the intensities of all
   1 While engineered rules are used in bond-breaking to account for certain well-studied rearrangements, we found the state-of-

the-art method CFM-ID still fails to assign a formula annotation within 10ppm to 42% of monoisotopic peaks in the NIST-20
dataset.



                                                               4
peaks falling within its endpoints. Spectrum prediction then becomes a vector-valued regression problem.
Mass-binning is conducive to GPU implementation and scales better than bond-breaking, but because a target
space with millions of mass bins is too large, realistic bin counts lose essential high resolution information
about the molecular formulas of the peaks: discarding a key strength of MS/MS analysis in favor of a tractable
learning problem. Such models are also susceptible to edge effects, where m/z measurement error of the
instrument can cause peaks of the same product ion to cross bin boundaries from spectrum to spectrum.
Other approaches include molecular dynamics simulation [21], which has extremely high computational costs;
and NLP-inspired models for peptides [22, 23], which are effective but inapplicable to other types of molecules.


4     GrAFF-MS
Our approach constitutes three major components: first, we represent the output space of spectrum pre-
diction as a space of probability distributions over molecular formulas. We then introduce a constant-sized
approximation of this output space using a fixed vocabulary of formulas, which we can generate from our
training data; we later show this introduces only minor approximation cost, as most formulas occur with low
probability. Finally, we derive a loss function that takes into account data-specific ambiguities introduced by
our model of the output space. These components together allow us to efficiently predict spectra using a
standard graph neural network architecture. We call our approach GrAFF-MS: (Gr)aph neural network for
(A)pproximation via (F)ixed (F)ormulas of (M)ass (S)pectra.

4.1    Modelling spectra as probability distributions over molecular subformulas
       of the precursor
Our aim is to predict a mass spectrum from a molecular graph. To do so, we must determine how to best
represent the output space: a spectrum comprises a variable-length set of peaks located at continuous m/z
positions, whose heights sum to one. We notice that peaks are not located arbitrarily: the set of m/zs is
structured, as the m/z of a peak is determined (up to measurement error) by the molecular formula of its
corresponding product ion. This formula is sufficient to determine the m/z; in particular, we do not need to
know the product ion’s full 2D structure. We therefore model a mass spectrum as a probability distribution
over molecular subformulas F(P ) of the precursor P :

                                         S = {(mf , yf ) : f ∈ F(P )}                                       (3)
         .
where mf = hµ, f i is the theoretical mass of formula f .
This is more efficient in principle than bond-breaking, which models a spectrum as a distribution over at
worst exponentially many substructures of the precursor. But the number of subformulas is only polynomial
in the coefficients of the precursor formula – and the majority of subformulas can be ruled out a priori as
chemically infeasible [17]. It is also less restrictive than bond-breaking, which relies on hand-engineered
rules to capture rearrangement reactions: enumerating subformulas is guaranteed to generate all possible
peaks, irrespective of whether the structure of their product ion is reachable by edge removals or not. Yet
our approach preserves the core advantage of bond-breaking over mass-binning: predicting a height for each
subformula yields spectra with perfect m/z resolution.

4.2    Fixed-vocabulary approximation of formula space
In practice, enumeration of subformulas is still a costly operation for larger molecules. One way to avoid
this would be to sequentially decode formulas of nonzero probability one at a time: we opt not to do so, as
this requires a more complex, data-hungrier model, and necessitates a linear ordering of formulas, for which
there is not an obvious correct choice. Instead, we exploit a property of small molecule mass spectra that we
discovered in this work, and illustrate in Figure 2 of the results: almost all of the signal in small molecule
mass spectra lies in peaks that can be explained by a relatively small number (∼2%) of product ion and
neutral loss formulas that frequently recur across spectra.



                                                       5
Inspired by this finding, we approximate F(P ) via the union F̂(P ) = P̂ ∪ (P − L̂) of a fixed set of frequent
product ion formulas P̂, and a variable set of ‘precursor-specific’ formulas P − L̂ obtained by subtracting
a fixed set of frequent neutral loss formulas L̂ from the precursor P . This greatly simplifies the spectrum
prediction problem: we now only need to predict a probability for each of the formulas in P̂ and L̂, which we
can accomplish with time constant in the size of the precursor.
Stated explicitly, we approximate the spectrum as:

                                           S ≈ {(mf , yf ) : f ∈ F̂(P )}                                     (4)

where a height of zero is implicitly assigned to any formula not in F̂(P ).
The fact that we can equally represent a product ion by either its own formula or a neutral loss formula
relative to its precursor ion is crucial to generalization. If we only included frequent product ion formulas, we
would explain peaks of low mass well, which typically correspond to small charged functional groups. But as
formula space becomes larger with increasing mass, it becomes increasingly unlikely that every significant
peak of higher mass in an unseen compound will be explained. However such peaks do not represent arbitrary
subformulas of the precursor: they tend to arise from losses of small uncharged functional groups and
combinations thereof, which we capture by including frequent neutral losses.
Our algorithm to generate P̂ and L̂ involves listing all product ion and neutral loss formulas yielded by
mass decomposition of the training set, and ranking them by the sum of the heights of all peaks to which
each formula is assigned; we select the top K highest ranked among either type. Pseudocode is provided in
appendix A.

4.3    Peak-marginal cross entropy
To train our approach, we must rely on formula annotations generated by mass decomposition. Because mass
spectrometers have limited resolution, it is often the case that more than one valid subformula has a mass
within measurement error of a peak. These are considered equiprobable a priori, and need not be mutually
exclusive: it is possible for a compound to contain two distinct substructures with m/z difference smaller
than the measurement error. As we cannot pick a single formula in such cases, we approximate the full cross
entropy by marginalizing over compatible formulas: this yields the peak-marginal cross entropy, which we
minimize w.r.t. the parameters of a neural network ŷ(·; θ):
                                             N X
                                             X                     X
                                     min −              yin log             ŷf (Gn ; θ)                     (5)
                                       θ
                                             n=1 i∈Sn             f ∈F̂in

                         .
using the shorthand F̂in = F̂(Pn ) ∩ F(Pn , mni , ) to indicate the intersection of our approximated vocabulary
with the formula annotations generated by mass decomposition. We provide a derivation from first principles
in appendix B.
In this formulation, given a molecular graph G of a precursor with formula P , our model predicts a probability
ŷf for every formula f in the fixed vocabulary. This produces a spectrum Ŝ = {(mf , ŷf ) : f ∈ F̂(P )}. These
per-formula probabilities are summed within each observed peak across its compatible formulas to yield a
predicted peak height, and the cross-entropy between the observed and predicted peak heights across the
entire spectrum is minimized.

4.4    Model architecture
Formulating spectrum prediction as graph classification permits a fairly typical GNN architecture. GrAFF-
MS uses a graph isomorphism network with edge and graph Laplacian features [24, 25, 26]: this encodes the
molecular graph into a dense vector representation, which is then conditioned on mass-spectral covariates
and passed through a feed-forward network that decodes a logit for each formula in the vocabulary.
We start with the graph of the 2D structure G = (V, E), to which we add a virtual node [27] and four classes
of features: node features ai ∈ Rdatom , edge features bij ∈ Rdbond , covariate features c ∈ Rdcov , and the top


                                                          6
eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the graph Laplacian vi ∈ Rdeig , λ ∈ Rdeig . We use the canonical atom and
bond featurizers from DGL-LifeSci [28] to generate a and b. Since a mass spectrum is not fully determined
by the molecular graph, c includes a number of necessary experimental parameters: normalized collision
energy, precursor ion type, instrument model, and presence of isotopic peaks. Further details are provided in
Table 2 of the appendix; there we also provide hyperparameter settings.
We first embed the node, edge, and covariate features into Rdenc , reusing the following MLP block:

                               MLP(·) = LayerNorm(Dropout(SiLU(Linear(·))))

and transform the Laplacian features into node positional encodings in Rdenc using a SignNet [26] with φ and
ρ both implemented as 2-layer stacked MLP blocks:

                                                 xatom
                                                  i    = MLPatom (ai )                                         (6)
                                                  xeig
                                                    i  = SignNet(vi , λ)                                       (7)
                                                  bond
                                                 xij = MLPbond (bij )                                          (8)
                                                  x cov
                                                              = MLPcov (c)                                     (9)

taking i ∈ V and (i, j) ∈ E. We sum the embedded atom features and node positional encodings, and pass
these along with embedded bond features into a stack of alternating L message-passing layers to update the
node representations, and L MLP layers to update the edge representations.
                                         (0)
                                      xi       = xatom
                                                  i    + xeig
                                                          i                                                   (10)
                                         (0)
                                      eij = xbond
                                             ij                                                               (11)
                                  X   (l+1)
                                               =X   (l)                 (l)
                                                          + GINEConv (G, X            (l)     (l)
                                                                                            ,E )              (12)
                                      (l+1)       (l)            (l)   (l)    (l+1)         (l+1)
                                   eij         = eij + MLPedge (eij kxi               kxj           )         (13)

where k denotes concatenation. The message-passing layer uses the GINEConv operation implemented in [29]:
for its internal feed-forward network, we use two stacked MLP blocks with GraphNorm [30] in place of layer
normalization. We similarly replace layer normalization with GraphNorm in the MLPedge blocks. Both node
and edge updates use residual connections, which we found greatly accelerate training.
We generate a dense representation of the molecule by attention pooling over nodes [31], to which we add
the embedded covariate features. This is decoded by a feed-forward network into a spectrum representation
xspec ∈ Rddec .

                                             ai = Softmaxi∈V (Linear(xi ))                                    (14)
                                                         (L)
                                                  X
                                           xmol =    ai xi                                                    (15)
                                                        i∈V

                                           xspec = MLPspec (xmol + xcov )                                     (16)

where MLPspec is a stack of L0 MLP blocks with residual connections. In principle we may now project this
representation via a linear layer (wk , bk ) into a logit zk for each of the K product ion or neutral loss formulas
in the vocabulary.

4.5    Domain-specific modifications
We must now introduce a number of corrections motivated by domain knowledge to produce realistic mass
spectra.
Following fragmentation, certain product ions can bind ambient water or nitrogen molecules as adducts,
shifting the mass of the fragment. This occurrence is annotated in our training set. For each formula in our
vocabulary, we therefore predict a logit for three different adduct states of the fragment, indexed by α: the
original product ion f , f + H2 O, and f + N2 . In effect this triples our vocabulary size.


                                                                  7
Depending upon instrument parameters, tandem mass spectra can display small peaks arising from higher
isotopic states of the precursor ion, at integral m/z shifts relative to the monoisotopic peak. Isotopic state is
independent of fragmentation: so rather than expanding our vocabulary again, we apply to all predictions a
shared offset for each isotopic state β ∈ {0, 1, 2}, which we parameterize on xspec .
As our vocabulary includes both product ions and neutral losses, we must deal with occasional double-counting:
depending on the precursor P , there are cases where the same subformula f will be predicted both as a
product ion (f ∈ P̂) and a neutral loss (P − f ∈ L̂). In such cases – denoted by the set D̂(P ) – we subtract a
log 2 correction factor from both logits: this way the innermost summation in Equation 5 takes the mean of
their contributions instead of their sum.
Applying these corrections and softmaxing yields the final heights of the predicted mass spectrum ŷ:

                                           zkαβ = wkα xspec + wβ xspec + bα
                                                                          k                                           (17)
                                                − I[k ∈ D̂(P )] log 2                                                 (18)
                                           ŷkαβ = Softmaxk,α,β (zkαβ )                                               (19)


5       Experiments
5.1     Datasets
5.1.1    NIST-20
We train our model on the NIST-20 tandem MS spectral library [32]. This is the largest dataset of high
resolution mass spectra of small molecules, curated by expert chemists, and is commercially available for a
modest fee.2 For each measured compound, NIST-20 provides typically several spectra acquired across a
range of collision energies. Each spectrum is represented as a list of (m/z, intensity, annotation) peak tuples,
in addition to metadata describing instrumental parameters and compound identity. The annotation field
includes a list of formula hypotheses per peak that were computed via mass decomposition.
We restrict NIST-20 to HCD spectra with [M + H]+ or [M − H]− precursor ions. We exclude structures
that are annotated as glycans or peptides or exceed 1000Da in mass (as these are not typically considered
small molecules), or have atoms other than {C, H, N, O, P, S, F, Cl, Br, I}.
We use an 85/5/10 structure-disjoint train/validation/test split, which we generate by grouping spectra
according to the connectivity substring of their InChiKey [34] and assigning spectra to splits an entire group
at a time. As CFM-ID only predicts monoisotopic spectra at qualitative energy levels {low, medium, high},
we restrict the test set to spectra with corresponding energies {20, 35, 50} in which no peaks were annotated
as higher isotopes. This yields 306,135 (19,871) training, 17,987 (1,167) validation, and 4,548 (1,637) test
spectra (structures).

5.1.2    CASMI-16
It is well known that uniform train-test splitting can overestimate generalization in molecular machine learning
[35]. To address this issue, we employ an independent test set: the spectra of the 2016 CASMI challenge
[36]. This is a small public-domain mass spectrometry dataset, constructed by domain experts specifically
for testing algorithms, and comprises structures selected as representative of those encountered ‘in the wild’
when performing mass spectrometry of small molecules.
We use [M + H]+ and [M − H]− spectra from the combined ‘Training’ and ‘Challenge’ splits from Categories
2 and 3 of the challenge. We exclude any structures from CASMI-16 with an InChiKey connectivity match
to any in NIST-20, yielding 156 spectra of 141 structures. The collision energy stepping protocol used in
   2 Open data is not the norm in small molecule mass spectrometry, as large-scale annotation requires substantial time

commitment from teams of highly-trained human experts. As a result, no public-domain dataset exists of comparable scale and
quality to NIST-20. However, NIST-20 and its predecessors are well-established in academic mass spectrometry, and have
been used in previous machine learning publications [10, 33].



                                                            8
CASMI-16 is simulated by predicting a spectrum at each of {20, 35, 50} normalized collision energy and
returning their mean.

5.2     Baselines
5.2.1    CFM-ID
CFM-ID [13] is a bond-breaking method, viewed by the mass spectrometry community as the state-of-the-art
in spectrum prediction [9]. We found CFM-ID prohibitively expensive to train on NIST-20 (one parallelized
EM iterate on a subset of ∼60k spectra took 10 hours on a 64-core machine) so we use trained weights
provided by its authors, learned from 18,282 spectra in the commercial METLIN dataset [37]. Domain
experts consider spectra acquired under METLIN’s conditions interchangeable with those of NIST-20 [38]
so it is reasonable to evaluate their model on our data.

5.2.2    NEIMS
NEIMS [10] is a feed-forward network that inputs a precomputed molecular fingerprint and outputs a
mass-binned spectrum, which is postprocessed using a domain-specific gating operation. We retrained
NEIMS on NIST-20, which necessitated two modifications: (1) we concatenate a vector of covariates to
the fingerprint vector, without which NIST-20 spectra are not fully determined; and (2) we bin at 0.1Da
intervals instead of 1Da intervals, to account for finer instrument resolution in NIST-20. We otherwise use
the same hyperparameter settings as the original paper, and early-stop on validation loss.

5.3     Evaluation metrics
We quantify predictive performance using mass-spectral cosine similarity, which compares spectra subject
to m/z measurement error [39] by matching pairs of peaks. For two spectra S and Ŝ, mass-spectral cosine
similarity CS,Ŝ is the value of the following linear sum assignment problem:

                                         .                    X                 yi ŷj
                                   CS,Ŝ =     max                       xij                              (20)
                                             xij ∈{0,1}                        kyk2 kŷk2
                                                           i∈S, j∈Ŝ:
                                                          |mi −m̂j |≤τ

                                                 s.t.                                                     (21)
                                                          P
                                                                  xij ≤ 1
                                                          Pi∈S
                                                             j∈Ŝ xij ≤ 1                                 (22)

We use the CosineHungarian implementation in the matchms Python package, with tolerance τ = 0.05.
We report mean cosine similarity across spectra, as well as the fraction of spectra scoring > 0.7, which is
commonly employed in spectral library search as a heuristic cutoff for a positive match [40].
We also compare runtime of GrAFF-MS against the bond-breaking method CFM-ID. For fair comparison,
we time a forward pass for each structure in the NIST-20 test split using only the CPU, without any batching.
We include time spent in preprocessing: our input is a SMILES string and experimental covariates, and our
output is a spectrum. As collision energy affects the number of peaks that CFM-ID generates, we predict
spectra at low, medium, and high energies and use the average runtime of the three.


6       Results
6.1     A fixed vocabulary of product ions and neutral losses closely approximates
        most mass spectra
Figure 2 demonstrates the fraction of ion counts explained in the average mass spectrum as the training
vocabulary size is varied. This shows most signal lies within peaks explainable by a relatively small number
of product ion and neutral loss formulas. In particular, the vocabulary we use (of size K = 104 ) is sufficient
to explain 98% of ion counts in the NIST-20 training split, which comprises 193,577 unique product ion
formulas and 348,692 unique neutral loss formulas. We observe that a fixed vocabulary generalizes beyond


                                                              9
Figure 2: Generalization of different heuristics for fixed-size vocabulary selection. For a given vocabulary size
on the x-axis, the y-axis indicates the sum of all explained peaks’ heights within a given spectrum, averaged
over all spectra.



NIST-20 to a separate dataset CASMI-16, indicating ‘formula sparsity’ is a general property of small
molecule mass spectra and not limited to our particular training set. We also compare alternative strategies
of picking only the top products or top losses: using both types of formulas explains more signal for a given
K than either alone.

6.2    GrAFF-MS outperforms bond-breaking and mass-binning on standard
       MS/MS datasets
Table 1 shows GrAFF-MS produces spectra with greater cosine similarity to ground-truth than either
baseline. More of our spectra also meet the CS Ŝ > 0.7 threshold for useful predictions. These results hold
both for the NIST-20 test split and the independent test set CASMI-16. We see all methods perform better
on CASMI-16 than NIST-20: this is because NIST-20 includes a minority of substantially larger molecules
(max weight 986Da) than CASMI-16 (max weight 539Da), with which all three methods struggle.


Table 1: Mean cosine similarity E[C] and fraction of useful predictions P(C > 0.7) on the NIST-20 test split
and CASMI-16. 95% confidence intervals are computed via nonparametric bootstrap.
                                           NIST-20 Test              CASMI-16
                                             (N = 4548)              (N = 156)
                          Method           E[C]    P(C>0.7)        E[C]   P(C>0.7)
                          CFM-ID         .52±.01     .35±.02     .75±.05    .70±.07
                          NEIMS          .60±.01     .50±.01     .63±.05    .54±.08
                          GrAFF-MS       .70±.01     .62±.02     .79±.05    .76±.07



6.3    Representing peaks as formulas scales better with molecular weight than
       bond-breaking
Figure 3 shows our approach to modelling high resolution spectra scales better with input size than bond-
breaking. CFM-ID takes on average 4.9 seconds per structure in the NIST-20 test split, and scales
quadratically (R2 = 0.78) with input size. (We believe this is because larger molecules in NIST-20 tend to
be approximately path graphs – e.g. long hydrocarbon chains – with only quadratically many connected
subgraphs.) In comparison, running GrAFF-MS on the CPU takes 1.3 core-seconds per spectrum, and


                                                       10
Figure 3: Empirical time complexity on NIST-20 structures with respect to molecular weight. Each dot is
a structure. Solid lines are quadratic (blue) and linear (red) fits; dotted line indicates an average over all
spectra computed using shuffled minibatches.



scales approximately linearly (R2 = 0.65). This pays off at larger molecular weight: for molecules > 500Da,
our model is 16× faster on average. Realistically, large-scale prediction will use the GPU: on a single GPU
with batch size 512, predicting all of the NIST-20 test spectra averages to 2.8ms per spectrum (mostly spent
in preprocessing on the CPU).
We can additionally estimate the time required for each approach to generate a reference library from all
2,259,751 structures below 1000Da in ChEMBL v3.1. Correcting for greater mean molecular weight in
ChEMBL (405Da vs 292Da), this would take 2 hours running our PyTorch research code as-is on a single
GPU. The same library would take 4 days to generate with 64 parallel instances of CFM-ID, which is written
in optimized C++ code – showing the importance of efficiently representing the output space.

6.4    GrAFF-MS distinguishes very similar compounds and makes human-like
       mistakes
In Figure 4 we show some particularly challenging examples of mass spectra. The top and middle panels
show two structurally similar compounds, differing only by the order of a carbon-carbon bond. Our approach
correctly predicts distinct spectra for each (CS Ŝ = 0.98, top; CS Ŝ = 0.95, middle). The third molecule is an
example where we fail to predict a realistic spectrum (CS Ŝ = 0.03), but in a manner in which a human expert
would also fail. This molecule is a member of the phthalate class, which chemists recognize by a characteristic
dominant peak at 149Da [41]. Our model predicts this same peak, correctly recognizing a phthalate: but in
this case that peak is relatively minor, indicating atypical fragmentation chemistry.


7     Discussion
In this work we develop GrAFF-MS, a graph neural network for predicting high resolution mass spectra of
small molecules. Unlike previous approaches that force a tradeoff between m/z resolution and a tractable
learning problem, GrAFF-MS is both computationally efficient and capable of modelling the high-resolution
m/z information essential to mass spectrometry. This is made possible by our discovery that mass spectra of
small molecules can be closely approximated as distributions over a fixed vocabulary of molecular formulas,
highlighting the value that domain-aware modelling can add to molecular machine learning. Particularly
surprising was that we outperform CFM-ID, which trades model expressivity for an even stronger scientific
prior that we expected would contribute to better generalization. However, this prior incurs a heavy cost in


                                                      11
Figure 4: Three compounds from CASMI-16, with spectra predicted by our model (blue) against negated
ground-truth (orange). Oxygens are shaded red by convention.



time complexity, making it impractical to train CFM-ID on hundreds of thousands of spectra as we did.
Future directions include pretraining on large-scale property prediction tasks, revisiting sequential formula
decoding, and incorporating additional scientific priors about fragmentation chemistry. Overall we anticipate
this work will both accelerate scientific discovery and demonstrate mass spectrometry to be a compelling
domain for continued machine learning research.


References
 [1] Katja Dettmer, Pavel A. Aronov, and Bruce D. Hammock. Mass spectrometry-based metabolomics.
     Mass Spectrometry Reviews, 26(1):51–78, August 2006.
 [2] Atanas G Atanasov, Sergey B Zotchev, Verena M Dirsch, and Claudiu T Supuran. Natural products in
     drug discovery: advances and opportunities. Nature reviews Drug discovery, 20(3):200–216, 2021.
 [3] Ethan D. Evans, Claire Duvallet, Nathaniel D. Chu, Michael K. Oberst, Michael A. Murphy, Isaac
     Rockafellow, David Sontag, and Eric J. Alm. Predicting human health from biofluid-based metabolomics
     using machine learning. Scientific Reports, 10(1), October 2020.
 [4] Hilary M. Brown, Trevor J. McDaniel, Patrick W. Fedick, and Christopher C. Mulligan. The current
     role of mass spectrometry in forensics and future prospects. Analytical Methods, 12(32):3974–3997, 2020.
 [5] F. Hernández, J. V. Sancho, M. Ibáñez, E. Abad, T. Portolés, and L. Mattioli. Current use of high-
     resolution mass spectrometry in the environmental sciences. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry,
     403(5):1251–1264, February 2012.




                                                     12
 [6] Ricardo R da Silva, Pieter C Dorrestein, and Robert A Quinn. Illuminating the dark matter in
     metabolomics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(41):12549–12550, 2015.
 [7] Oliver Fiehn. Critical Assessment of Small Molecule Identification 2022. http://www.casmi-contest.
     org/2022/index.shtml/, 2022. [Online; accessed 12-December-2022].
 [8] Stephen Stein. Mass spectral reference libraries: An ever-expanding resource for chemical identification.
     Analytical Chemistry, 84(17):7274–7282, July 2012.
 [9] Christoph A Krettler and Gerhard G Thallinger. A map of mass spectrometry-based in-silico fragmenta-
     tion prediction and compound identification in metabolomics. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 22(6), March
     2021.
[10] Jennifer N. Wei, David Belanger, Ryan P. Adams, and D. Sculley. Rapid prediction of electron–ionization
     mass spectrometry using neural networks. ACS Central Science, 5(4):700–708, March 2019.
[11] Hao Zhu, Liping Liu, and Soha Hassoun. Using graph neural networks for mass spectrometry prediction,
     2020.
[12] Adamo Young, Bo Wang, and Hannes Röst. Massformer: Tandem mass spectrum prediction with graph
     transformers, 2021.
[13] Fei Wang, Jaanus Liigand, Siyang Tian, David Arndt, Russell Greiner, and David S. Wishart. CFM-ID
     4.0: More accurate ESI-MS/MS spectral prediction and compound identification. Analytical Chemistry,
     93(34):11692–11700, August 2021.
[14] Christoph Ruttkies, Steffen Neumann, and Stefan Posch. Improving MetFrag with statistical learning of
     fragment annotations. BMC Bioinformatics, 20(1), July 2019.
[15] Robert K. Lindsay, Bruce G. Buchanan, Edward A. Feigenbaum, and Joshua Lederberg. DENDRAL:
     A case study of the first expert system for scientific hypothesis formation. Artificial Intelligence,
     61(2):209–261, June 1993.
[16] Kai Dührkop, Marcus Ludwig, Marvin Meusel, and Sebastian Böcker. Faster mass decomposition. In
     Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 45–58. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[17] Tobias Kind and Oliver Fiehn. Seven golden rules for heuristic filtering of molecular formulas obtained
     by accurate mass spectrometry. BMC Bioinformatics, 8(1), March 2007.
[18] Liu Cao, Mustafa Guler, Azat Tagirdzhanov, Yi-Yuan Lee, Alexey Gurevich, and Hosein Mohimani.
     Moldiscovery: learning mass spectrometry fragmentation of small molecules. Nature Communications,
     12(1):1–13, 2021.
[19] Anna Gaulton, Anne Hersey, Michał Nowotka, A. Patrícia Bento, Jon Chambers, David Mendez,
     Prudence Mutowo, Francis Atkinson, Louisa J. Bellis, Elena Cibrián-Uhalte, Mark Davies, Nathan
     Dedman, Anneli Karlsson, María Paula Magariños, John P. Overington, George Papadatos, Ines Smit,
     and Andrew R. Leach. The ChEMBL database in 2017. Nucleic Acids Research, 45(D1):D945–D954,
     November 2016.
[20] F. W. McLafferty. Mass spectrometric analysis. molecular rearrangements. Analytical Chemistry,
     31(1):82–87, January 1959.
[21] Jeroen Koopman and Stefan Grimme. From QCEIMS to QCxMS: A tool to routinely calculate CID
     mass spectra using molecular dynamics. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry,
     32(7):1735–1751, June 2021.
[22] Xie-Xuan Zhou, Wen-Feng Zeng, Hao Chi, Chunjie Luo, Chao Liu, Jianfeng Zhan, Si-Min He, and
     Zhifei Zhang. pDeep: Predicting MS/MS spectra of peptides with deep learning. Analytical Chemistry,
     89(23):12690–12697, November 2017.
[23] Siegfried Gessulat, Tobias Schmidt, Daniel Paul Zolg, Patroklos Samaras, Karsten Schnatbaum, Johannes
     Zerweck, Tobias Knaute, Julia Rechenberger, Bernard Delanghe, Andreas Huhmer, Ulf Reimer, Hans-



                                                     13
    Christian Ehrlich, Stephan Aiche, Bernhard Kuster, and Mathias Wilhelm. Prosit: proteome-wide
    prediction of peptide tandem mass spectra by deep learning. Nature Methods, 16(6):509–518, May 2019.
[24] Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural networks?
     In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May
     6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
[25] Weihua Hu, Bowen Liu, Joseph Gomes, Marinka Zitnik, Percy Liang, Vijay Pande, and Jure Leskovec.
     Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
     tions, 2020.
[26] Derek Lim, Joshua Robinson, Lingxiao Zhao, Tess Smidt, Suvrit Sra, Haggai Maron, and Stefanie Jegelka.
     Sign and basis invariant networks for spectral graph representation learning, 2022.
[27] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
     message passing for quantum chemistry. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the
     34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August
     2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
[28] Mufei Li, Jinjing Zhou, Jiajing Hu, Wenxuan Fan, Yangkang Zhang, Yaxin Gu, and George Karypis.
     Dgl-lifesci: An open-source toolkit for deep learning on graphs in life science. ACS Omega, 2021.
[29] Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In ICLR
     Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
[30] Tianle Cai, Shengjie Luo, Keyulu Xu, Di He, Tie-Yan Liu, and Liwei Wang. Graphnorm: A principled
     approach to accelerating graph neural network training. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors,
     Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021,
     Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1204–1215. PMLR, 2021.
[31] Meng Joo Er, Yong Zhang, Ning Wang, and Mahardhika Pratama. Attention pooling-based convolutional
     neural network for sentence modelling. Information Sciences, 373:388–403, December 2016.
[32] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Nist-20, 2020.
[33] Kai Dührkop. Deep kernel learning improves molecular fingerprint prediction from tandem mass spectra.
     Bioinformatics, 38(Supplement_1):i342–i349, June 2022.
[34] Stephen R Heller, Alan McNaught, Igor Pletnev, Stephen Stein, and Dmitrii Tchekhovskoi. InChI, the
     IUPAC international chemical identifier. Journal of Cheminformatics, 7(1), May 2015.
[35] Zhenqin Wu, Bharath Ramsundar, Evan N. Feinberg, Joseph Gomes, Caleb Geniesse, Aneesh S. Pappu,
     Karl Leswing, and Vijay Pande. MoleculeNet: a benchmark for molecular machine learning. Chemical
     Science, 9(2):513–530, 2018.
[36] Emma L. Schymanski, Christoph Ruttkies, Martin Krauss, Céline Brouard, Tobias Kind, Kai Dührkop,
     Felicity Allen, Arpana Vaniya, Dries Verdegem, Sebastian Böcker, Juho Rousu, Huibin Shen, Hiroshi
     Tsugawa, Tanvir Sajed, Oliver Fiehn, Bart Ghesquière, and Steffen Neumann. Critical assessment of
     small molecule identification 2016: automated methods. Journal of Cheminformatics, 9(1), March 2017.
[37] Carlos Guijas, J. Rafael Montenegro-Burke, Xavier Domingo-Almenara, Amelia Palermo, Benedikt
     Warth, Gerrit Hermann, Gunda Koellensperger, Tao Huan, Winnie Uritboonthai, Aries E. Aisporna,
     Dennis W. Wolan, Mary E. Spilker, H. Paul Benton, and Gary Siuzdak. METLIN: A technology platform
     for identifying knowns and unknowns. Analytical Chemistry, 90(5):3156–3164, January 2018.
[38] Maria Lorna A. De Leoz, Yamil Simón-Manso, Robert J. Woods, and Stephen E. Stein. Cross-ring
     fragmentation patterns in the tandem mass spectra of underivatized sialylated oligosaccharides and their
     special suitability for spectrum library searching. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry,
     30(3):426–438, December 2018.
[39] Wout Bittremieux, Robin Schmid, Florian Huber, Justin J. J. van der Hooft, Mingxun Wang, and
     Pieter C. Dorrestein. Comparison of cosine, modified cosine, and neutral loss based spectrum alignment


                                                      14
    for discovery of structurally related molecules. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry,
    33(9):1733–1744, August 2022.
[40] Gert Wohlgemuth, Sajjan S Mehta, Ramon F Mejia, Steffen Neumann, Diego Pedrosa, Tomáš Pluskal,
     Emma L Schymanski, Egon L Willighagen, Michael Wilson, David S Wishart, Masanori Arita, Pieter C
     Dorrestein, Nuno Bandeira, Mingxun Wang, Tobias Schulze, Reza M Salek, Christoph Steinbeck,
     Venkata Chandrasekhar Nainala, Robert Mistrik, Takaaki Nishioka, and Oliver Fiehn. SPLASH, a
     hashed identifier for mass spectra. Nature Biotechnology, 34(11):1099–1101, November 2016.
[41] Yassin A. Jeilani, Beatriz H. Cardelino, and Victor M. Ibeanusi. Density functional theory and mass
     spectrometry of phthalate fragmentations mechanisms: Modeling hyperconjugated carbocation and
     radical cation complexes with neutral molecules. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry,
     22(11), August 2011.
[42] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. 2015.




                                                    15
A     Fixed vocabulary selection
Algorithm 1 describes our procedure for selecting the product ions P̂ and neutral losses L̂. We use the
shorthand Fin = F(Pn , mi , ) to indicate the set of formulas computed by mass decomposition. When mass
decomposition yields more than one formula annotation for a peak, here we split the peak height uniformly
among all annotations.

Algorithm 1 Fixed vocabulary selection
  Input: training spectra and precursors {(Sn , Pn )}N
                                                     n=1 , vocabulary size K, tolerance 
  Initialize Ff = 0, Ll = 0, P̂ = ∅, L̂ = ∅
  for n = 1 . . . N do
    for (mi , yi ) ∈ Sn do
       for f ∈ Fin do
          l = Pn − f
          Ff = Ff + yi /|Fin |
          Ll = Ll + yi /|Fin |
       end for
    end for
  end for
  Sort F and L
  while |P̂| + |L̂| ≤ K do
    f = first element of F
    l = first element of L
    if Ff > Ll then
       Add f to P̂
       Remove f from F
    else
       Add l to L̂
       Remove l from L
    end if
  end while



B     Derivation of peak-marginal cross entropy
We derive our loss function from physical first principles, making a number of minor modelling assumptions:
    • The number of precursor ions accumulated by the instrument is Poisson with rate λ.
    • Each individual precursor ion is independently converted into fragment f with probability pf .
    • The instrument resolution parameter  is sufficiently small that separate peaks do not overlap: there
      exists exactly one peak i(f ) for every f : pf > 0 satisfying |hµ, f i − mi | ≤ mi .
By the splitting property, the number of ions of each fragment are independently PoissonP
                                                                                        with rate λf = λpf .
By the merging property, the height of peak i is also a Poisson r.v. Ki with rate λi = f ∈Fi λf , where Fi
denotes the set of fragments whose theoretical masses all fall within the measurement error mi of peak i.




                                                     16
The log-likelihood for the peak height is (taking equality up to constants C w.r.t. pf ):

                                     log P (Ki = ki )                                                  (23)
                                  = ki log λi − λi − log ki !                                          (24)
                                                                
                                              X               X
                                  = ki log       λf  −       λf  + C                               (25)
                                                 f ∈Fi                    f ∈Fi
                                                                                       
                                                   X                       X
                                  = ki log              λpf  −                  λpf                (26)
                                                 f ∈Fi                     f ∈Fi
                                                                            
                                                                  X                       X
                                  = ki log λ + ki log                    pf  − λ                pf   (27)
                                                                  f ∈Fi                   f ∈Fi
                                                                     
                                                         X                        X
                                  = C + ki log                  pf  − λ              pf              (28)
                                                         f ∈Fi                f ∈Fi


where (25) uses merging, and (26) uses splitting. Because each fragment is assigned to exactly one peak
(no overlap), the peak heights {Ki : i ∈ S} are independent. Let the total number of accumulated ions
K = i∈S ki in spectrum S. Defining yi = ki /K:
     P

                                   log P ({Ki = ki : i ∈ S})                                           (29)
                                   X
                                 =     log P (Ki = ki )                                                (30)
                                     i∈S
                                                                                           
                                     X                    X                        X
                                 =         ki log               pf  − λ                pf          (31)
                                     i∈S                 f ∈Fi                    f ∈Fi
                                                     
                                   X             X          XX
                                 =  (Kyi ) log    pf  − λ    pf                                      (32)
                                     i∈S                   f ∈Fi                   i∈S f ∈Fi
                                                                     
                                       X                  X
                                 =K            yi log            pf  − λ · 1                         (33)
                                       i∈S                f ∈Fi
                                                                     
                                       X                  X
                                 =C          yi log              pf  + C 0                           (34)
                                       i∈S               f ∈Fi


where (33) again uses our assumption that every fragment is assigned to exactly one peak. Dropping the
constants and negating the final term yields the peak-marginal cross-entropy loss for a single spectrum.




                                                                 17
C     Model hyperparameters
We use a vocabulary of K = 10000 formulas. We train an L = 6-layer encoder and L0 = 2-layer decoder
with denc = 512 and ddec = 1024, resulting in 44.6 million trainable parameters. We use the deig = 8
lowest-frequency eigenvalues, truncating or padding with zeros. All dropout is applied at rate 0.1. We use a
batch size of 512 and the Adam optimizer [42] with learning rate 5 × 10−4 . We train for 100 epochs and use
the model from the epoch with the lowest validation loss. All models are trained using PyTorch Lightning
with automatic mixed precision on 2 Tesla V100 GPUs.


D     Mass spectral covariates

                               Table 2: Mass spectral covariates used in our model.

 Feature                         Range                             Comment
                                                                   Thermo Scientific PSB104,
 Normalized collision energy     [0, 200]
                                                                   “Normalized Collision Energy Technology”

 Precursor type                  [M + H]+ , [M − H]−               Includes ionization mode & adduct composition

                                 Orbitrap Fusion Lumos,
 Instrument model                Thermo Finnigan Elite Orbitrap,   Different limits of detection
                                 Thermo Finnigan Velos Orbitrap

 Has isotopic peaks              False, True                       Proxy for width setting of precursor mass filter




                                                        18
