                                             SpecTUS: Spectral Translator for Unknown Structures
                                                       annotation from EI-MS spectra
                                           Adam Hájek1 , Michal Starý2 , Elliott Price3 , Filip Jozefov4,5 , Helge Hecht3 ,
                                                                         Aleš Křenek1*




arXiv:2502.05114v2 [cs.LG] 20 Feb 2026
                                               1 Institute of Computer Science, Masaryk University, Šumavská 525/33,

                                                                            Brno, 602 00, Czech Republic.
                                           2 School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University Munich,

                                                         Boltzmannstraße 3, Garching bei München, 85748, Germany.
                                            3 RECETOX, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, Brno, 625 00, Czech Republic.
                                                4 Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, Botanická 554/68a,

                                                                            Brno, 602 00, Czech Republic.
                                             5 Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the CAS, Flemingovo nám.

                                                                542/2, Praha 6-Dejvice, 160 00, Czech Republic.


                                                         *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): ljocha@ics.muni.cz;
                                                     Contributing authors: ahajek@mail.muni.cz; michal.stary@tum.de;
                                                          elliott.price@recetox.muni.cz; filip.jozefov@uochb.cas.cz;
                                                                        helge.hecht@recetox.muni.cz;


                                                                                         Abstract
                                              Compound identification and structure annotation from mass spectra are essential in drug
                                              detection, forensics, and small molecule discovery. All the current approaches to compound
                                              identification from electron ionization mass spectra (EI-MS) are dependent on different forms
                                              of searching databases that are orders of magnitude smaller than the space of potential
                                              molecular structures they attempt to cover.
                                              We introduce SpecTUS: Spectral Translator for Unknown Structures, a deep learning model
                                              for de novo structural annotation, translating gas chromatography EI-MS spectra directly into
                                              molecular structures without requiring reference databases. This enables the identification of
                                              novel compounds absent from spectral libraries.
                                              In a rigorous evaluation, SpecTUS significantly outperformed standard database search tech-
                                              niques. On a held-out test set of 28 267 spectra from NIST 20, the model’s single suggestion
                                              perfectly reconstructed 43% of the subset’s compounds, strictly outperforming hybrid database
                                              search (common method among practitioners) in 76% of cases. With ten suggestions, it
                                              achieved 65% perfect reconstructions, surpassing hybrid search in 84% of cases.

                                              Keywords: GC-EI-MS, GC-MS, mass spectrometry, gas chromatography, transformer, electron
                                              ionization, NMT, deep learning, machine learning, spectra reconstruction, compound annotation




                                         Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is a widely used method for identifying com-
                                         pounds, particularly those that are volatile and thermally stable. In the first stage, compounds



                                                                                              1
are separated via gas chromatography. Next, neutral molecules are ionized, generating charged
ions for analysis. The MS then measures the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of each fragment, along
with the abundance of fragments at each m/z value. After processing, this analysis produces a
mass spectrum for each compound, represented as a series of peaks. Each peak corresponds to a
unique fragment mass and is encoded as a pair of m/z value and its relative intensity, reflecting
the fragment’s abundance in the sample.
    Different mass spectrometry methods produce spectra with distinct characteristics based on,
amongst other factors, the ionization technique and the number of spectrometry iterations. One of
the most widely used, established methods is GC-EI-MS, where EI stands for electron ionization.
A standard electron energy of 70 eV has been used for decades, ensuring relative consistency across
spectra and compatibility of different spectral libraries. However, the variation in spectra still
persists [1]. As this approach is central to our research, GC-EI-MS will be the focus of this study.
    Compound identification from GC-EI-MS spectra has been approached in three main ways:
database search, extended database search, and de novo generation.
    In a standard database search, we compare the spectrum against a library of experimentally
measured reference spectra using either simple similarity search (SSS) or hybrid similarity search
(HSS) [2, 3]. SSS, which matches only peaks with the same (similar) m/z value, is effective when the
compound being analyzed is present in the spectral library, a scenario known as the spectral match
task. When the compound is absent from the library – the closest structure identification task –
HSS typically performs better. HSS incorporates structural information by matching neutral losses
in addition to fragment ions. It calculates these neutral losses by shifting one of the spectra based on
the molecular weight difference (DeltaMass) between the query and library compounds. However,
for HSS to work accurately, a precise DeltaMass is required, which depends on the molecular
weight of the query compound — a value that is not always reliably estimated from GC-EI-MS
spectra. A widely used GCMS-ID webserver [4] implements similar search approach combined with
scoring on retention index; together with an impressive collection of curated references spectra it
represents the state-of-the-art in standard database search.
    Extended search approaches aim to address the limited size of spectral databases by expand-
ing the scope of references available for comparison. One extreme from among these methods is
an ab-initio generation of synthetic EI-MS spectra, as implemented in QCEIMS [5], by simulat-
ing the fragmentation with quantum-chemical calculation. However, achieving sufficient accuracy
requires high-level methods (e.g., DFT), making this approach impractical for large-scale database
generation [6].
    Another approach to EI spectra generation is rule-based prediction [7]. In this family of
approaches commercial software such as MS-Fragmenter [8] exists, but those lack open source code
and algorithm transparency.
    Machine learning-based methods offer a faster alternative for generating synthetic spectra,
though often at the cost of losing some accuracy. NEIMS [9] algorithmically computes the extended
connectivity fingerprints (ECFP) [10] of a molecular structure and feeds it into a smartly designed
multilayer perceptron to generate a low-resolution synthetic EI-MS spectrum. The model, trained
on 240 000 experimental spectra from the NIST 17 dataset, is known for its simplicity and reason-
able reliability, making it the foundation of several other methods [11, 12]. A more sophisticated
alternative, RASSP [13], processes the structural formula augmented by atomic features with
a graph neural network (GNN). The GNN output is passed to an attention-equipped neural
network to predict fragments and their relative abundances. These fragments are then trans-
formed into an EI-MS spectrum using exact atomic masses and isotopic patterns, producing
high-resolution outputs. Compared to NEIMS, RASSP generates more accurate spectra but is
limited to a small set of atom types (8 in the published version) and by the number of possible
fragment formulae (4096).
    To improve accuracy and search speed in extended spectral databases, recent methods lever-
age machine learning to map EI-MS spectra into alternative vector spaces. DeepEI [11] is a
model trained to translate spectra into molecular fingerprints which can be rapidly computed
for vast structural libraries such as ZINC or PubChem, moving the similarity search into the



                                                   2
space of fingerprints. FastEI [12] combines NEIMS with a spectral embedding method inspired
by Word2Vec [14], producing vector representations (embeddings) of spectra that later serve for
rapid library searching.
    To address the challenges of coverage and information loss from intermediate translations,
recent de novo methods directly translate spectra into molecular structures. Inspired by neu-
ral machine translation architectures, these methods typically generate SMILES [15] strings
autoregressively based on encoded spectral information.
    So far, all the de novo models have been exclusively trained on tandem mass spectrometry
spectra (LC-MS/MS) resulting from a two-staged fragmentation process. In the first stage, the
method uses soft ionization process (ESI) that enables extracting the precursor ion mass (approxi-
mately the molecular mass of the analyzed compound). The precursor ion is further fragmented by
hard ionization process in the second stage yielding a mass spectrum similar, yet not comparable,
to EI-MS.
    For instance, MassGenie [16], a ∼400 million parameter encoder-decoder transformer, maps
MS/MS spectra, represented as embeddings of m/z values combined with positional encoding into
SMILES strings. It was pretrained on 4.7 million synthetic spectra and finetuned on approximately
200 000 experimental spectra from the GNPS dataset. Another method, Spec2Mol [17], separately
trains a GRU autoencoder on 138 million SMILES strings, creating a latent space of molecular
structures. Further, the trained GRU decoder is combined with a CNN encoder that learns to
map experimental MS/MS spectra to the GRU’s molecular latent space using 28 000 examples
from the NIST library. MSNovelist [18] employs an RNN encoder-decoder architecture relying
on SIRIUS [19] to predict a molecular formula and structural fingerprint from MS/MS spectra.
The encoder maps these inputs onto a latent space vector used further by an LSTM decoder
to generate a SMILES string character-by-character, aided by a continuously updated molecular
subformula representing remaining atoms. The model was trained on a dataset combining HMDB,
COCONUT, and DSSTox databases comprising 1.2 million molecular structures. Another method,
MS2Mol [20], employs an encoder-decoder transformer enhanced with precursor mass information
trained on around 1 million MS/MS spectra. The model emphasizes output ordering optimization
with a dedicated re-ranking model. Finally, Mass2SMILES [21] utilizes a smaller transformer
encoder paired with a TCN decoder and explores variational autoencoders with continuous latent
space generation trained on 83 000 experimental MS/MS spectra from the GNPS dataset.
    While tandem MS enables richer analysis and can yield precursor ion weights or even formulas
of compounds, the method’s increased complexity introduces more adjustable parameters. Due to
the lack of consensus on standard settings, its variability can reduce consistency across spectral
libraries.
    We argue that despite missing precursor ion weight, the character and consistency of EI-MS
spectra make them a well-suited representation for machine learning models focused on molecular
structure annotation. In this paper, we introduce SpecTUS: a Spectral Translator for Unknown
Structure reconstruction from low-resolution EI-MS spectra. At its core, SpecTUS is a 354 million
parameter encoder-decoder transformer model that takes encoded mass spectrum as input and
directly generates molecular structure as a SMILES string. The model can produce an arbitrary
number of candidate structures, each accompanied by an inherent certainty score.
    Our training process began with pretraining on a synthetic dataset of 2 × 8.6 million spectra
generated by NEIMS and RASSP models, believed to capture sufficient foundation knowledge on
the structure-spectra relationships. We then finetuned SpecTUS on 232 025 clean, experimentally
measured spectra from NIST 20 (NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Library of electron ionization
spectra, 2020 version) to adjust to true experimental data. Additionally, we conducted experiments
to assess the impact of various pretraining strategies, tokenization schemes, and input encoding
methods, adapting the model to suit the spectra-to-molecules translation task as closely as possible.
Our evaluation demonstrates that SpecTUS effectively identifies unseen compounds, showcasing
its potential for accurate, rapid structure annotation from EI-MS spectra.




                                                 3
   Alongside the paper, we release two datasets together containing 17.2 million synthetic spectra
generated by NEIMS and RASSP models, the pretrained SpecTUS model, and all necessary train-
ing and evaluation scripts, accompanied by a detailed tutorial. While the final finetuned model
cannot be distributed freely due to NIST’s commercial licensing, we provide preprocessing scripts
and our data splits to support full reproducibility. We also provide a hosted demo application with
limited access to the final model for anyone to test the model’s capabilities.

Results
SpecTUS evaluation was driven by the motivation to demonstrate that the method is capable of
generalization, i.e. it captures knowledge contained in the training data and is able to apply it to
unseen spectra of unseen compounds.
   Moreover, we show that SpecTUS outperformed traditional database search methods when
identifying compounds not present in the reference database. This highlights its capability to
address the limitations of existing approaches in the compound identification task.

Baselines
We compared SpecTUS against database search methods using the NIST 20 dataset, where the
SpecTUS training set (232 035 spectra, see Sect. Finetuning dataset for details) served as the
reference library for database search and disjoint testing sets were used as queries. The reference
library did not overlap with any test or validation data, and it remained representative for practical
applications in terms of size.
    Our evaluation included the following baselines:
• Simple Similarity Search (SSS): This method is universally applicable for database searches
  as it does not rely on any additional measurements or precise molecular weight (MW) esti-
  mates. It matches query spectra to the library based purely on spectral similarity, computed as
  augmented cosine similarity on a set of matching peak pairs [3].
• Hybrid Similarity Search (HSS): The most commonly used method for closest structure
  identification from a database. HSS combines fragment ion matching with neutral loss analysis
  and incorporates the molecular weight of the query compound into the computation [3]. While
  effective, HSS depends on knowing the molecular weight information, which is not always reliably
  determined from EI-MS spectra. However, for our evaluation purposes, we provide the weight
  available in the testing sets, which biases the results towards better HSS performance compared
  to the real-world scenario.
• Best Database Candidate (BDC): For this baseline, the best candidate is selected from
  the reference library based on structural similarity between the query compound and reference
  compounds, measured by Tanimoto similarity over Morgan fingerprints [10]. This approach is
  artificial, and we don’t have access to it in real-world scenarios because the analyte’s structure
  is precisely what we aim to determine. We use BDC to determine the upper bound for database
  search methods.
These baselines reflect both standard practices and theoretical limits of conventional methods for
spectra identification.

Metrics
Evaluation of SpecTUS performance, its comparison with the baseline, as well as with other
solutions is based on several metrics we describe briefly in this section. Detailed formal definitions
of those can be found in Sect. Methods. All the metrics assume they are applied on a given test
set of spectra for which the structures (ground truth) are known.
    For a given set of test spectra, top-k accuracy (Acck ) lets the model predict k structures for
each spectrum, and measures the proportion of spectra for which the correct structure appears
among the model’s k predictions.


                                                  4
    Average top-k similarity (Simk ) quantifies how structurally similar, on average, the most
accurate candidate is to the ground truth molecule. For each query, the similarity is calculated
as the highest Tanimoto similarity between the Morgan fingerprints of the ground truth molecule
and each of the first k retrieved candidates. The similarities are then averaged over all queries in
the testing set.
    To compare two methods, we define the win rate of the first method as the proportion of
test spectra for which its best prediction among the top k is strictly better than that of the
other method. To overcome the imperfection of Morgan fingerprints, an exact structural match is
considered the best outcome; if neither method achieves an exact match, the one with the higher
Tanimoto similarity on Morgan fingerprints is deemed superior. Similarly, the at-least-as-good
rate complements the win rate. That is, draws are counted in favor of the first method too.



Scenarios
We evaluated the model’s performance in three scenarios, varying the number of returned can-
didates: 1, 10, and 50. As the number of candidates increased, the overall top-k performance
improved, demonstrating the model’s ability to provide more comprehensive predictions. However,
while the model assigns sequence probabilities to rank its generated candidates, this ranking is
not sufficiently reliable to replace expert evaluation. For instance, the model’s top-ranked candi-
date from a set of 10 is, on average, slightly less accurate than the one candidate generated in the
single-candidate scenario. This suggests that manual expert validation remains crucial for multi-
candidate scenarios. Consequently, we did not use the model-based ranking during evaluation. The
three evaluated scenarios are as follows:
• Single-candidate scenario (SpecTUS1 ): Requires no manual intervention but has lower
  accuracy, making it suitable for high-throughput workflows where speed is prioritized over
  precision.
• Ten-candidate scenario (SpecTUS10 ): Offers a balanced trade-off, providing sufficient diver-
  sity in predictions while keeping manual evaluation manageable. This makes it particularly
  well-suited for practical use in analysis workflows.
• Fifty-candidate scenario (SpecTUS50 ): Demonstrates the model’s potential for providing
  highly accurate predictions but at the cost of substantial manual effort to evaluate all candidates.
By tailoring the number of generated candidates to the specific application, users can leverage the
model’s strengths while balancing accuracy and effort.



Datasets
To evaluate SpecTUS, we used a held-out NIST 20 test split (see Section 5) along with sev-
eral publicly available libraries, including SWGDRUG, Cayman, and MONA. The NIST 20 and
SWGDRUG databases provide highly curated spectra, making them ideal for training and vali-
dation. In contrast, testing on the Cayman and MONA libraries allowed us to assess the model’s
performance on spectra collected and processed with less standardized methods, highlighting the
challenges posed by varying spectral acquisition techniques.
    To demonstrate the generalization capabilities of SpecTUS, we carefully filtered all test sets to
exclude any compounds present in the synthetic or experimental training datasets. Additionally,
compounds containing deuterium, which was not included in the training datasets, were removed,
and model-specific filters were applied – a maximum m/z value of 500, a maximum of 300 peaks
per spectrum, and a maximum SMILES length of 100 characters. The vast majority of spectra
removed from SWGDRUG, Cayman library, and MONA were excluded due to overlap with the
NIST 20 training set.
    Table 1 provides a detailed overview of the final dataset sizes before and after filtering.


                                                  5
                      Table 1 The number of spectra in each test library before and after
                      filtering. The filtering included removing overlaps with the NIST
                      training set, removing compounds containing deuterium, and filtering
                      out datapoints with m/z exceeding 500, more than 300 peaks, or
                      SMILES string exceeding 100 characters.

                                           NIST test    SWGDRUG        Cayman      MONA
                           original size      29218         3589          2262      18914
                        used for testing      28267         1640           469       5015




Fig. 1 Percentage of cases where database search methods (SSS and HSS) successfully retrieved the closest struc-
ture from the reference database among the top-1, top-10, and top-50 suggested candidates. Performance is evaluated
across all test sets: NIST test split, SWGDRUG, Cayman, and MONA.


Baseline results
Initially, we compared SSS and HSS, to the upper-bound based on structural similarity (BDC)
to quantify the limitations of current database search methods (Figure 1 and Table A1). The
analysis focuses on the percentage of cases where the standard database search methods (SSS,
HSS) successfully retrieved the most structurally similar compound from the database among their
top-k candidates. Importantly, this metric does not evaluate the quality of the retrieved candidates
relative to the ground truth; rather, it highlights how standard database search methods perform
within the inherent constraints of database searching. Across all test sets (NIST test, SWGDRUG,
Cayman, and MONA), several patterns emerged.
    The performance of database search methods was relatively consistent across datasets, except
for MONA, possibly due to higher occurrence of TOF spectra or generally less thorough curation.
Surprisingly, results for the NIST test set were lower than those of Cayman, despite better curation
of the NIST library.
    HSS consistently outperformed SSS, demonstrating its superiority across all datasets. However,
even HSS struggled as the top-50 candidate list did not surpass the 60% success rate, and the
performance of HSS10 hovered around 50% at maximum. SSS failed to exceed the 30% success
rate, even with 50 retrieved candidates, and SSS1 retrieved the optimal candidate in only around
10% cases.
    Finally, the number of retrieved candidates significantly impacts performance. Extending the
list from 1 to 10 candidates yields a substantial improvement, but further extending it to 50
candidates offers only marginal additional gains, especially considering the increased workload for
experts required to manually evaluate these candidates. For practical purposes, retrieving a single
candidate is insufficient, delivering the correct structure in only about 20% cases (HSS), depending
on spectrum quality.
    These findings confirmed that current standard database search methods, while commonly
used in practice, have limits in identifying unknown compounds.


                                                        6
Fig. 2 Comparison of average similarity and accuracy metrics across all tested methods, testing datasets, and
three retrieval scenarios (1, 10, and 50 candidates). ST represents SpecTUS, while the abbreviations of the baseline
database search methods (SSS, HSS ) are explained in the text – Section Baselines. Simk is displayed by the color
bars, similarity of the theoretical upper bound for database search methods (BDC ) is expressed as a pink dashed
line. Acck values for SpecTUS are shown in black lines; they are inherently zero for all the other methods. The
three Acck values in each column correspond to 1, 10, and 50 candidates, displayed from bottom to top.



SpecTUS results
The essential results of SpecTUS comparison with traditional database search methods are shown
in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. The tables with exact values supporting the figures are included in Sect. A.2.
    SpecTUS’ capability to generate candidates it has not encountered during training allows it
to accurately reconstruct compounds that database search cannot identify precisely. As shown in
Figure 2, with just one candidate, the SpecTUS accuracy (finding the correct compound) Acc1 is
43% on the NIST test set. With 10 candidates, it reached the accuracy of 65%. For the less curated
datasets, the Acck lowered, but even for the MONA dataset, SpecTUS reached Acc1 of 21% and
Acc10 of 34%. The Acck for any database search method in this scenario is inherently 0%.
    On the NIST test and SWGDRUG datasets, which contain thoroughly curated spectra, Spec-
TUS achieved an average top-1 similarity of 0.67 and 0.69, respectively, outperforming HSS even
with 50 candidates (62 for NIST and 0.61 for SWGDRUG), and it approached the theoretical best
database performance that reached 0.72 for NIST and 0.69 for SWGDRUG.
    In the ten-candidate scenario, SpecTUS improved further, achieving average similarities of
0.81 on NIST and 0.82 on SWGDRUG, surpassing even the theoretical limit of database search
(BDC); this is an evidence of SpecTUS’ capability to generalize beyond the search among known
structures.
    For less curated datasets, such as Cayman Library and MONA, the performance gap between
SpecTUS and database search methods has narrowed. However, even on these datasets, a single
SpecTUS prediction matched the performance of 10 candidates retrieved by HSS.
    The win and at least as good rates of SpecTUS compared to HSS and BDC across datasets
(Figure 3 and Table A6) further illustrate the model’s strengths. When compared to HSS
(Figure 3A), SpecTUS consistently performed better on more rigorously curated spectra (NIST
test, SWGDRUG) and benefited more from generating additional candidates, except on the MONA
dataset. Specifically, SpecTUS achieved win rates of 76–86% on NIST, 72–85% on SWGDRUG,
63–74% on Cayman, and 62–65% on MONA. When draws were included, the at least as good
rate increased further, reaching 80–90% on the NIST test and SWGDRUG datasets. These find-
ings demonstrate that SpecTUS is a far more reliable candidate generator for identifying novel
molecules than standard HSS.
    Figure 3B shows SpecTUS’ comparison with BDC, highlighting its ability to outperform even
the best candidates in the database. On the NIST test and SWGDRUG datasets, a single SpecTUS


                                                         7
Fig. 3 Comparison of win rate and at-least-as-good rate of SpecTUS over database search method HSS (A) and
a theoretical database search upper bound BDC (B) across all testing datasets, and three retrieval scenarios (1,
10, and 50 candidates). The diagram evaluates corresponding retrieval scenarios, such as SpecTUS10 versus HSS10
(Win(SpecTUS10 , HSS10 ), providing a direct comparison of performance under identical conditions.


candidate was strictly better than BDC in 47% and 45% cases, respectively. However, with 10 can-
didates, SpecTUS outperformed BDC in 70% of the cases for both the NIST test and SWGDRUG
and in 56% cases for the Cayman library. The at least as good rate of SpecTUS10 again raised the
bar a bit higher, ranging between 72–74% on the NIST test and SWGDRUG datasets. The win
rate on the MONA dataset ranged from 21-40% which mirrors SpecTUS’ decreased performance
on less curated spectra. Again, these results show SpecTUS’ ability to effectively generalize over
training data and to help mitigate the database coverage issue.
    For the complete results comparing SpecTUS with database search methods, refer to the
supplementary tables in A6.

Examples
To better understand the predictive performance of SpecTUS and HSS, we analyzed their Sim10
scores on 200 randomly sampled queries from the NIST test set. As shown in Figure 4, the scat-
terplot compares the Sim10 scores of both models, with the dashed diagonal indicating equal
performance. Notably, SpecTUS achieved a perfect Tanimoto similarity score of 1 in 65% of the
queries, highlighting its ability to make accurate predictions more consistently than HSS. Addi-
tionally, five examples, highlighted in red on the scatterplot and detailed in the accompanying
table, were handpicked to illustrate common error types that occur during predictions.
    One frequent error involves extending or shortening repetitive chains, as seen in example 2
for HSS and example 5 for SpecTUS. Another typical issue is the addition of a correct functional
group but on an incorrect atom in an aromatic ring, such as in example 1 (SpecTUS) and example
2 (SpecTUS). A third type of error involves accurately decoding large molecular substructures
but incorrectly connecting them, as illustrated in example 3 (SpecTUS). These examples serve to
visually highlight typical challenges in molecular prediction tasks and provide a sense of how such
errors look in practice.
    Example 5 also highlights a limitation of the Tanimoto similarity metric when applied to
molecular fingerprints. HSS prediction, in this case, achieves a perfect similarity score despite
representing a different molecule from the ground truth. This issue arises particularly in long,
repetitive chains, where structural differences may not impact the fingerprint representation. Tan-
imoto similarity is a useful and widely used measure, but its limitations should be considered,
especially in cases where structural nuances are critical.

Inference speed
The size of SpecTUS (354 million parameters) allows the model to be powerful enough to handle
the task at hand yet lightweight enough to be meaningfully used in practical applications. To


                                                       8
Fig. 4 The scatterplot on the left illustrates the Sim10 scores for 200 randomly sampled queries from the NIST test
set, comparing SpecTUS and HSS predictions. Each point represents a single query, with its position determined
by the Sim10 scores of SpecTUS (x-axis) and HSS (y-axis). The dashed line indicates where both models achieved
identical Sim10 values. Notably, 65% of the SpecTUS predictions reached a perfect Tanimoto similarity of 1.
Highlighted in red are five specific examples, further detailed in the table on the right. For each example, the
ground truth molecule (Label) and the predictions from HSS and SpecTUS are shown, along with their Tanimoto
similarity (T) to the label, computed using Morgan fingerprints. For faster comparison, correctly predicted regions
are marked with green ellipses, while errors are enclosed in red ellipses. These examples were hand-picked to
illustrate typical errors and highlight specific regions of the scatterplot.


                          Table 2 The time required to generate 1, 10, or 50
                          candidates for a single query was evaluated across three
                          hardware settings. In the H100 setting, we used the top tier
                          NVIDIA H100 80 GB graphics card, the RTX5000 setting
                          used one mid-range NVIDIA Quadro RTX 5000 16GB GPU,
                          and the CPU setting uses one Xeon Gold 6130 CPU along
                          with 8 GB of RAM.

                                         1 candidate    10 candidates    50 candidates
                            H100         0.2 s          0.4 s            1.9 s
                            RTX5000      0.5 s          1.1 s            7.6 s
                            CPU          8s             36 s             450 s


demonstrate its potential usage scenarios, we benchmarked SpecTUS inference on three hardware
setups: a high-end GPU, a mid-range GPU, and a laptop-like CPU configuration. While exact
prediction speeds depend on the specific hardware used, we provide a general overview in the
Table 2.
    Our benchmarks show that SpecTUS inference can run comfortably on a single CPU with 8
GB of RAM, processing a spectrum in approximately 8 seconds for a single generated candidate
or 36 seconds for 10 candidates. Using even an affordable mid-range GPU significantly accelerates
inference, enabling spectra to be analyzed within seconds or even fractions of a second.

Discussion
SpecTUS addresses the problem of de novo mass spectra reconstruction, which means a direct
translation from the domain of mass spectra into the domain of molecular structures. It focuses on
processing unseen spectra of unknown compounds, and it is the first model specifically designed to
reconstruct molecular structures from low-resolution GC-EI-MS spectra without requiring addi-
tional supporting information like a precursor ion mass or molecular formula (on the contrary,
SpecTUS predicts these even more accurately than recent methods [22]).
    Our approach was inspired by existing de novo MS/MS spectra reconstruction models, such as
MSNovelist [18] or Spec2Mol [17], and especially MassGenie [16] which adopted various concepts
from natural language processing. In addition to adapting our model to a different type of spectra,
we introduced several novel ideas, some inspired by neural machine translation. These include
integrating multiple sources of synthetic spectra, innovative input encoding, and spectra source
indication. Each new approach was experimentally evaluated to ensure the optimal configuration
(see Section 5).


                                                        9
    The SpecTUS’s architecture is an encoder-decoder transformer with 354 million trainable
parameters, based on BART [23], developed for natural language processing originally. The model
was pretrained on a large set of synthetic spectra to develop a comprehensive understanding of
the chemical space of small molecules, followed by finetuning on NIST 20, a smaller high-quality
set of experimental spectra. While this general pretraining-finetuning strategy has been employed
in models like MassGenie and MSNovelist, SpecTUS introduces a unique approach to generating
and integrating synthetic spectra, setting it apart from previous methods.
    SpecTUS was evaluated on multiple test datasets, including a held-out subset of NIST and
subsets of SWDRUG, Cayman, and MONA libraries. To align with the unknown compound identi-
fication scenario, the testing compounds were strictly disjoint from all compounds used for training
both spectra generators and SpecTUS. Potential data leakage was avoided by excluding conflicting
records based on canonicalized SMILES strings with stereoisomeric nuances removed, effectively
ensuring no overlap between the training and testing sets. This rigorous data separation allowed us
to confidently state that SpecTUS is capable of true generalization on unseen compounds rather
than simply memorizing the training sets. Across all the testing datasets, the model achieved
molecule reconstruction accuracies ranging from 21–43% (Acc1 ) and 34–65% (Acc10 ) as shown in
Table A2.
    On the other hand, SpecTUS, like many de novo and extended database search approaches,
cannot explicitly justify its specific outputs for a given input. It lacks an intermediate represen-
tation, such as peak annotations or fragmentation trees (cf. [24, 25]), and it does not provide
reference spectra for the candidate structures (typical in standard database searches). This limits
the possibility of further manual correction of the predicted molecular structures. Additionally,
the model’s poorer performance on the Cayman and MONA test sets – compared to the more rig-
orously curated NIST or SWGDRUG libraries – highlights its sensitivity to the quality of input
spectra.
    We compare SpecTUS with the traditional structure identification approach widely used
by practitioners, which relies on searching reference spectra databases. This approach typically
involves either exact peak matching (simple similarity search – SSS) when the compound is sus-
pected to be present in the database, or a more complex hybrid similarity search (HSS) to identify
the closest structure when the compound is absent [2, 3]. Setting aside the combinatorial estimate
of the number of all possible small molecules, which is around 1060 [26], structural “spectra-
less” databases contain roughly 109 unique molecules. In contrast, commercially available spectral
libraries for database searching hold only a few hundred thousand spectra, significantly limiting
the pool of potential matches for compound identification. As we show on the NIST held-out test-
ing set, in case the analyzed compound is missing from the reference library, the HSS is able to
find the library’s closest structure in only 19% cases when retrieving the single best candidate.
Practitioners typically refine these candidates through manual analysis and suggest structural cor-
rections. In the same setting, SpecTUS was able to offer a strictly better candidate than HSS in
76% of the cases, and in 43% it correctly identified the exact compound.
    The extended database search approaches attempt to address the issue of insufficient library
coverage by enlarging it artificially. DeepEI [11] achieves a top-1 accuracy (Acc1 ) of 27.8% (com-
pared to SpecTUS, which ranges from 21% to 43%). However, we argue that its reference library
of 170,000 fingerprints is far too small to adequately cover chemical space, making it insufficient
for annotating truly unknown structures. Moreover, increasing the library size would inevitably
decrease accuracy as a larger search space inherently leads to more false positives. DeepEI also
relies on molecular weight information, which may not always be available, and is restricted to
compounds containing only the 10 most common elements. FastEI [12] reports an even higher Acc1
of 36.7% while expanding its reference library to 2.2 million synthetic spectra. However, we argue
that this coverage remains inadequate, given the over 1 billion known compounds in ZINC, and it
is still limited to just 11 elements. In contrast, SpecTUS was trained on 17.2 million spectra from
8.6 million compounds. Given its de novo nature and demonstrated generalization ability, its pre-
dictions are not restricted to training spectra. Notably, as the training set size increased (Section
5), SpecTUS consistently improved in accuracy.



                                                 10
    A straightforward comparison of SpecTUS with other de novo approaches is challenging, as
all existing models were designed and trained for MS/MS spectra. Although MS/MS methods
suffer from lower output stability, they provide richer spectral information, allowing for the direct
extraction of precursor ion mass. Notably, except for MassGenie, all previously published de novo
methods rely on precursor ion mass or molecular formula, which serve as valuable cues in the
annotation process. In terms of performance, MassGenie [16], which employs a similar transformer-
based architecture as SpecTUS, reported an Acc100 of 53%. This was measured on an experimental
testing set of 93 spectra filtered from the original 243 spectra in the CASMI 2017 competition using
model-specific filters. MSNovelist [18] achieved an Acc128 of 57% on the CASMI 2016 competition
dataset (127 spectra) and 45% on the GNPS dataset (3863 spectra). However, MSNovelist relies on
two streams of input – spectral information encoded as a fingerprint and a precomputed molecular
formula. When the authors removed the spectral information from the input, and the model was
provided only the molecular formula, the reported Acc128 dropped to 52% and 31% for CASMI
2016 and GNPS, respectively. This raises concerns about potential data leakage in the declared
results. Other de novo models, report significantly lower performance and are less comparable to
SpecTUS. MS2Mol [20] yields 21% of “close match” accuracy, which is a far more relaxed metric.
Mass2SMILES [21] appears to be rather premature, having less than 1% of exact matches, and
approx. 2% of close match accuracy. In the most comparable scenario to existing de novo methods,
SpecTUS achieved an Acc50 of 69% on the NIST test set, which includes 28 267 experimental
spectra.
    To summarize, in this paper, we present SpecTUS, a novel end-to-end model for de novo recon-
struction of low-resolution GC-EI-MS spectra. Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate
the impact of key design choices, offering transferable insights and good practices for future work.
These include innovative input and output encoding strategies and the synergistic benefits of
leveraging multiple synthetic spectra sources for pretraining. After identifying the optimal model
architecture and training configuration, we rigorously compared SpecTUS to widely used database
search techniques, showcasing its superior performance in terms of both identification accuracy
and the molecular similarity of retrieved candidates.
    We argue that while low-resolution GC-EI-MS spectra are less informationally rich compared
to MS/MS spectra, SpecTUS achieves accuracy levels that are practically applicable in real-world
scenarios.
    Looking forward, we plan to explore how the increasing availability of high-resolution GC-MS
data could further enhance molecular structure prediction. Additionally, we aim to investigate the
effects of scaling up pretraining datasets to improve performance further.


Methods
Our model is built upon the standard Transformer architecture [27], the BART [23] in particular,
with certain design modifications and hyperparameters tuned specifically to optimize molecular
structure annotation from mass spectra. The training process involved pretraining on large datasets
of synthetic spectra generated using custom-trained NEIMS and RASSP models, followed by
finetuning on the experimental spectra from the NIST 20 library.


Metrics
Overall description of metrics used in SpecTUS evaluation and its comparison with other models
was given in Sect. Results. Here their detailed formal definitions are provided for completeness.
   Top-k accuracy (Acck ) measures the percentage of predictions where the correct match is
within the first k retrieved candidates. It is formally defined as:

                                                       n
                                                  100 X
                               Acck (Ck , G) :=          1(Gi ∈ Cki )
                                                   n i=1


                                                  11
Fig. 5 Overview of the SpecTUS method. The diagram illustrates relationships of all models (blue), datasets
(grey) and training stages (green) involved in constructing SpecTUS. It also highlights the final inference process
(red), showing how the model transitioned from training to producing ranked molecular predictions.



where k is the number of candidates considered, n is the number of queries, Ck is a list of n
predictions and each prediction Cki for query i contains at most k candidate molecules. G is the
list of ground truth molecules, one for each query, and Gi is a single ground truth molecule for
query i. 1 is an indicator function that returns 1 if the condition inside is true and 0 otherwise.
    Average top-k similarity (Simk ) quantifies how structurally similar, on average, the most
accurate candidate among the first k retrieved molecules is to the ground truth molecule. For each
query, the similarity is calculated as the highest Tanimoto similarity between the Morgan finger-
prints of the ground truth molecule and each of the first k retrieved candidates. The similarities
are then averaged over all queries in the testing set. Mathematically, the metric is defined as:

                                                        n
                                                 1X
                                Simk (Ck , G) :=       max T(ϕ(c), ϕ(Gi ))
                                                 n i=1 c∈Cki

where T (f1 , f2 ) denotes the Tanimoto similarity between two molecular fingerprints, and ϕ(m) is
the Morgan fingerprint of molecule m.
    Additionally, we derived two metrics to compare two sets of predictions, Ck and Ck′ , for a
common set of queries: win rate and at-least-as-good rate.
    First, we had to define what it means for a prediction Cki to be better than a prediction
  ′
Cki  given ground truth molecule Gi . Tanimoto similarity on Morgan fingerprints is the standard
approach to comparing molecules. However, because fingerprints are typically a lossy representa-
tion, situations can arise where T(ϕ(m1 ), ϕ(m2 )) = 1 while m1 ̸= m2 . To address such ambiguities,
we enhanced the ranking function with a control mechanism that checks for an exact match
between candidates and the ground truth. This mechanism ensures that when both predictions
achieve perfect similarity, the exact match determines superiority. The ranking function R is then
defined as follows:

                                             if max T(ϕ(c), ϕ(Gi )) > max T(ϕ(c′ ), ϕ(Gi ))
                                   
                                    1                                ′ ′
                                   
                                   
                                               c∈Cki                      c ∈Cki
                                   
                       ′
              R(Cki , Cki , Gi ) =   1       if Gi ∈ Cki ∧ Gi ∈  ′
                                                              / Cki
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     0       otherwise
                                   


                                                        12
Win rate calculates the percentage of cases where predictions Ck are strictly better than
predictions Ck′ according to the ranking function R. It is defined as:
                                                         n
                                                    100 X
                             Win(Ck , Ck′ , G) :=                   ′
                                                           R(Cki , Cki , Gi )
                                                     n i=1

At-least-as-good rate extends the win rate by including cases where the two sets achieve equal
top-k similarity (draws). This metric completes the information about direct models’ performance
comparison by reflecting instances where predictions Ck are either better than or equivalent to
predictions Ck′ :
                           ALAG(Ck , Ck′ , G) := 100 − Win(Ck′ , Ck , G)

Model
SpecTUS utilizes an encoder-decoder architecture with 12 encoder blocks and 12 decoder blocks,
16 attention heads, an embedding size of 1024, and hidden layers of feed-forward blocks of size
4096.
    The model’s input is a set of peaks represented by m/z and intensity values. The output is
an autoregressively generated molecular structure representation encoded as a SMILES string.
SpecTUS was trained on low-resolution GC-EI-MS spectra, and since integer m/z values already
encode the relative position of peaks (unlike words/tokens in language models), we use the original
positional encoding channel to encode intensity information. Thus, the model has three trainable
sets of embeddings – m/z values, binned intensities, and SMILES characters. The encoder receives
a sum of embeddings representing m/z values and intensities – one aggregated embedding for
each peak in the spectrum; the decoder generation is based on a sequence of embeddings, each
representing one SMILES character.
    Following the standard bounds for small molecules and NIST 20 library statistics, the model-
specific thresholds for training and input data were set to a maximum of 300 peaks, an m/z limit
of 500, and a maximum SMILES length of 100. Applying these thresholds resulted in excluding
approximately 3% of the NIST dataset. A detailed analysis of the impact of these filters is presented
in Figure B1.
    In total, our model consists of 354 million trainable parameters.

Pretraining datasets
Pretraining on synthetic spectra is a core component of the SpecTUS model. For the early exper-
iments, we collected 4.7 million compounds (synth1 ) from the ZINC library and proved that
pretraining greatly boosts the models’ performance. For the last stage of SpecTUS development,
we decided to step up the pretraining stage and double the size of the pretraining dataset by
repeating the collection process once again. This time we gathered another 4.8 million compounds
(synth2 ).
    To uniformly cover the known chemical space, we first scraped 1.8 billion SMILES strings
from the ZINC20 library using the 2D-standard-annotated-druglike query. From this dataset, we
extracted a random sample of 30 million noncorrupted SMILES strings shorter than 100 characters
in each round. Further, we canonicalized, deduplicated, and stripped the SMILES of stereochemical
information. Importantly, we removed all NIST 20 compounds to prevent data leakage. Filtering
the 30-million sets to compounds RASSP can process (8 most common elements, number of possible
subformulae) reduces the dataset down to approx. 4.7 (synth1 ) and 4.8 (synth2 ) millions. To
evaluate the impact of RASSP and NEIMS respective spectrum prediction capabilities on SpecTUS
performance, we generated spectra for the same set of compounds by both models. In total, the
pretraining datasets comprises 9.4 + 9.6 million spectra.
    Lastly, we split each synthetic dataset into training, validation, and test sets using a 0.9 : 0.05 :
0.05 ratio. The splitting process was random, but corresponding splits (training, validation, and
test sets) for the NEIMS and RASSP-generated spectra contained the same compounds to avoid


                                                    13
cross-leak. Both NEIMS- and RASSP-generated halves of both synthetic datasets (synth1 and
synth2 ) are available on the Hugging Face Hub for further research and replication.

Finetuning dataset
For the finetuning stage, we filtered all corrupted or nonannotated spectra from the low-resolution
NIST 20 GC-EI-MS library, removed stereochemistry information, and canonicalized the SMILES
strings. The dataset was split into training, validation, and test sets with an 0.8 : 0.1 : 0.1 ratio,
ensuring that duplicates were always placed in the same split. After applying model-specific filters,
the final dataset included 224 737 training spectra, 28 177 validation spectra, and 28 267 testing
spectra. The lists of compounds forming all three datasets are provided in the project’s GitHub
repository.

Preprocessing
The preprocessing pipeline for spectra includes two key steps: rounding the m/z values to the
nearest integer and logarithmically binning the relative intensity values into one of 30 bins using
a logarithm base of 1.28 (details in Section Experiment 1: Intensity binning). Additionally, each
encoded SMILES sequence is enriched with a special token indicating the source of the spectra
(<rassp>, <neims>, <nist>). This strategy, inspired by multilingual language models [23, 28],
was designed to enable the model to adapt to the unique characteristics of spectra from different
sources.

Pretraining
SpecTUS was pretrained on both synth1 and synth2, using a balanced 1:1 mixture of NEIMS-
generated and RASSP-generated synthetic spectra. This pretraining stage provided the model with
a broad understanding of the chemical space of small molecules, enhancing its ability to generalize
effectively (as demonstrated in Section Experiment 3: Pretraining dataset mixing). Pretraining
was conducted with a batch size of 128 for 448 000 updating steps, allowing the model to process
each of the 17.2 million spectra approximately three times.
    The entire pretraining process, including control evaluations on validation sets (single candi-
date) every 16 000 steps, was completed in 58 hours using a single NVIDIA H100 GPU. To save
time and computational resources during these evaluations, we used a random subset of 10 000
NIST validation spectra and 30 000 synthetic spectra.
    During pretraining, the percentage of correctly reconstructed structures increased steadily but
it remained relatively low at the end of the stage: 38% for RASSP-generated spectra, 29% for
NEIMS-generated spectra, and 3% for NIST spectra. However, 96% of the generated SMILES
strings (RASSP, NEIMS) were valid canonical molecules, with 91% (RASSP), 78% (NEIMS), and
14% (NIST) having correct molecular formulas, though possibly incorrect structures. These results
suggest that during the pretraining phase, the model successfully learned molecular structure
rules and the relationship between atomic weight and m/z values, forming a good foundation for
subsequent finetuning.

Finetuning
In the second stage, SpecTUS was finetuned to enhance its ability to recognize and process real-
world experimental data. The model was trained for 296 000 steps on the NIST training set,
allowing it to process each spectrum approximately 80 times.
    The finetuning process, including control evaluations on validation sets every 21 068 steps
(approximately every 12 epochs), was completed in 28 hours on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU. To
conserve time and computational resources, control evaluations used the full NIST validation set
but were limited to a subset of 2 000 synthetic spectra.
    During finetuning, the model’s ability to reconstruct structures from synthetic spectra dropped
sharply to zero, with formula-matching accuracy decreasing to 19% for NEIMS-generated spectra


                                                 14
and 17% for RASSP-generated spectra after just six epochs. However, validation results for NIST
spectra skyrocketed above the convergence level of models trained exclusively on experimental
spectra, as demonstrated in Section Experiment 3: Pretraining dataset mixing.

Hyperparameter search
One of the main contributions of this paper is a series of experiments that offer practical insights
and best practices for developing machine-learning models, particularly transformer-based archi-
tectures, for spectrometry and chemistry. While some findings are technical, they provide valuable
guidance to streamline the design and optimization of future models.
    First, we investigated different methods for binning relative intensity values to effec-
tively represent continuous data. We compared the performance of two molecular representa-
tions—SELFIES [29] and SMILES [15]—in a generative modelling task and experimented with
tokenization techniques for text-based molecular structures. Next, we examined the benefits of
pretraining on synthetic data and identified best practices for dataset labeling and dataset mix-
ing strategies. Lastly, we pushed the performance boundaries by leveraging larger datasets and
extended training durations.
    To optimize computational resources, we tailored our experimental approach. For the first two
experiments, we skipped the pretraining phase and conducted only finetuning on the NIST dataset,
using 74 000 updating steps. For experiments focused on pretraining, we included a pretraining
phase of 124 000 steps, followed by a finetuning phase of 74 000 steps. These run lengths were
chosen to identify meaningful trends while maintaining manageable computational costs.

Experiment 1: Intensity binning
In the first experiment, we tried to find the optimal method for binning relative intensity values,
enabling each value to be represented as a trainable embedding vector. We compared several
variants of linear and logarithmic binning methods. For linear binning, we tested precision levels
of 2, 3, and 4 decimal places, corresponding to 100, 1 000, and 10 000 bins, respectively, each with
its own trainable embedding. For logarithmic binning, we used the formula

                                     n = max(⌊logb (i)⌋ + s), 0)

where n is the assigned bin index to intensity value i, logarithm base b changes the shape of the
final bin distribution, and shift s helps to set a particular number of bins for relative intensity
values between 0 and 1. The max function ensures all the lowest intensities transformed to negative
values fall into the bin 0. We evaluated four configurations, with the total number of bins (s + 1)
being 10, 21, 30, and 40. For each variant, we tuned the parameter b on the NIST training set
intensities to distribute the values into bins as evenly as possible (see the distributions in Section
C.1). Binning beyond 40 bins was not practical, as the bin ranges became excessively narrow,
leaving many bins empty and thus non-trainable.
    Over-simplified binning approaches (linear binning with 2 decimal places and logarithmic bin-
ning with 10 bins) led to a 3–4% drop in validation Acc1 compared to the other models in the
experiment. This performance decline was likely caused by significant information loss: for exam-
ple, 47% of the smallest intensity values were set to zero with 2-decimal-place linear binning.
Similarly, 10-bin logarithmic binning lacked sufficient granularity for lower intensity values, as
illustrated by histogram comparisons in Section C.1.
    Higher-resolution binning methods—linear binning with 3 or 4 decimal places and logarithmic
binning with 21, 30, or 40 bins—achieved comparable results, with validation performance varying
within a 1% margin. Among these, logarithmic binning with 30 bins emerged as the optimal choice.
It provided a 0.9% improvement in validation Acc1 compared to 4-decimal-place linear binning
while reducing the number of trainable parameters by 10 million, demonstrating its efficiency and
validity as a binning strategy.
    The tracked control evaluations for this experiment can be found in Figure C6, and the
comparison with the rest of the experiment runs is in Table C7.


                                                 15
Experiment 2: Molecular Representations and Tokenization
In this experiment, we aimed to find the optimal molecular representation generated by the model’s
decoder. First, we evaluated two different structural representations for molecules, comparing
SMILES and SELFIES. SELFIES, a token-based successor to the well-established SMILES rep-
resentation, was specifically designed for generative neural networks, guaranteeing the validity of
every sequence by construction. Further, we explored enhancing classic character-level SMILES
encoding through Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) tokenization [30], which segments strings into fre-
quent multi-character groups. This technique, widely adopted in early natural language generation
(NLG) applications [31, 32], allows models to directly generate tokens with higher-level semantic
meanings, potentially corresponding to molecular functional groups.
    To investigate the impact of BPE tokenization, we trained four BPE tokenizers with varying
vocabulary sizes on a random set of one million SMILES strings sampled from the synth dataset.
The vocabulary size was indirectly controlled by adjusting the minimal substring frequency hyper-
parameter (mf) to values of 10, 100, 10K, and 10M. These settings yielded vocabulary sizes of
1 286, 780, 367, and 267 tokens, respectively, with the smallest vocabulary (mf10M → 256 byte
tokens + 11 special tokens) corresponding to a character-level encoding. The relationship between
vocabulary size and minimal substring frequency is visualized in Figure C7.
    Models using SMILES strings with BPE tokenization consistently outperformed the model
trained on SELFIES, achieving improvements of 1.7–5.8% in validation Acc1 . Interestingly, con-
trary to expectations based on NLG, larger BPE vocabularies did not lead to better performance.
Instead, the character-level encoding (mf10M) outperformed all the BPE tokenizations by a mar-
gin of 3.5–4% on validation Acc1 . The trend suggests not only that “the smaller the vocabulary,
the better the performance” but also that even introducing relatively few aggregated tokens into
the vocabulary can significantly degrade performance.
    We currently lack a clear hypothesis to explain why SMILES outperformed SELFIES. How-
ever, based on the results of the models’ comparison, we infer that the Transformer architecture
effectively constructs higher-level molecular semantics internally within its decoder blocks. This
suggests that keeping the representation simple, such as through character-level encoding, grants
the model greater expressive freedom, ultimately leading to better performance.
    The tracked control evaluations for the tokenization experiment can be found in Figure C8,
and the comparison with the rest of the experiment runs is in Table C7.



Experiment 3: Pretraining dataset mixing
For pertaining experiments, we used the synth1 dataset (see Section Pretraining datasets) con-
taining 4.7 million compounds or 9.4 million spectra generated by the NEIMS and RASSP models.
To assess the impact of pretraining on the final model performance, we compared the 30-bin non-
pretrained model from the last experiment to four models that were first pretrained on different
mixtures of datasets and then finetuned on the NIST training set. The dataset mixing strategy
involved random sampling from all datasets in the mixture without repetition, with the proportion
of each dataset controlled by a weight parameter.
    The pretraining experiments used four dataset combinations: RASSP-only, NEIMS-only, a 1:1
mix of NEIMS and RASSP (NEIMS:RASSP), and a mixture of NEIMS, RASSP, and a small
fraction of NIST data in a 1:1:0.1 ratio (NEIMS:RASSP:NIST). The inclusion of NIST data in the
last configuration was intended to accelerate the initial stage of finetuning and potentially keep
this advantage throughout the training process.
    Pretraining was conducted for a fixed number of 112 000 steps, and with a batch size of 128,
approximately 14.3 million examples were processed during pretraining. The number of epochs
varied depending on the dataset mixture; for example, in the NEIMS:RASSP mix, each spectrum
was seen approximately 1.7 times on average, while for the RASSP-only mixture, each spectrum
was encountered about twice as many times. The performance of all models was compared on the
NIST validation set after the finetuning phase.


                                                16
   In the experiment, the models pretrained on synthetic datasets outperformed the finetuned-only
model by 7–10% on validation Acc1 , clearly exceeding the convergence level of the non-pretrained
model. Among the pretrained models, the NEIMS-only model achieved 2% better Acc1 than
the RASSP-only model. However, combining NEIMS and RASSP datasets in a 1:1 ratio led
to the best performance, improving accuracy by an additional 1% compared to NEIMS-only
pretraining. Including a small fraction of experimental NIST data in the pretraining mix
(NEIMS:RASSP:NIST) did not improve the final performance.
   From these results, we deduce that despite the questionable quality of synthetic spectra, hav-
ing broader coverage of the chemical space during pretraining helps the model generalize better.
Combining spectra from two sources is more effective than training on a single source for twice as
many epochs.
   The tracked control evaluations for this experiment can be found in Figure C9, and the
comparison with the rest of the experiment runs is in Table C7.

Experiment 4: Source indication
After identifying the optimal pretraining strategy, we evaluated whether the model benefits from
including source indication via a special token preceding the generated SMILES sequence (see
Section Preprocessing). To test this, we compared the RASSP:NEIMS pretrained and NIST fine-
tuned model from the previous experiment, which used distinct source tokens to indicate the origin
of each spectrum, with an otherwise identical setting that utilized a single generic source token
for all datasets.
    The experiment revealed that the source indication had no substantial impact on performance.
It did not affect control validations during pretraining, and at the end of finetuning, the model
with a single source token performed 0.2% better on Acc1 than the one with three distinct source
tokens. Despite this, we retained the source indication mechanism in the final model to allow
for potential use in future finetuning experiments on smaller custom datasets. Users can decide
whether to explore this feature further or use the default <nist> token on their data.
    The tracked control evaluations for this experiment can be found in Figure C10 and the
comparison with the rest of the experiments runs is in Table C7.

Experiment 5: Training length and dataset size
In the final experiment, we assessed the impact of extended training duration and a larger dataset
on the model’s performance. Using the best-performing model from Experiment 3 as the baseline
– pretrained on synth1 NEIMS:RASSP balanced mix (4.2 million training compounds) for 112 000
steps and finetuned on the NIST experimental spectra for 74 000 steps – we explored various
combinations of extended pretraining and finetuning lengths, as well as larger training datasets.
All other hyperparameters, including those related to binning, tokenization, and dataset mixing,
were kept consistent with the findings of Experiments 1-3.
    To simplify comparisons, we used a naming convention: the number of pretraining com-
pounds, pretraining steps, and finetuning steps (e.g., 4.2M_112k_74k for the baseline model).
The tested combinations included (1) doubling the pretraining duration to 224k steps while keep-
ing finetuning at 74k steps (4.2M_224k_74k), (2) doubling both pretraining and finetuning steps
(4.2M_224k_148k), (3) pretraining on the combined synth1 and synth2 datasets with prolonged
pretraining and finetuning (8.6M_224k_148k), and (4) a full-scale training setting with both
datasets and quadrupled pretraining and finetuning to maximize convergence (8.6M_448k_296k).
    Doubling the pretraining stage alone to 224 000 steps (4.2M_224k_74k) improved Acc1 by
1.2%. Further doubling the finetuning stage (4.2M_224k_148k) increased Acc1 by another 0.7%.
Expanding the dataset size to include both synth1 and synth2 (8.6M_224k_148k) yielded a 0.9%
gain in Acc1 . These isolated improvements indicate that extending training duration and increasing
dataset size independently benefit the model. While we lack the analysis of all combinations to
draw definitive conclusions, the results suggest that scaling pretraining, finetuning, and dataset
size contribute similarly to performance gains. Still, among the tested approaches, expanding the
dataset size was the most effective option, as it required no additional computing power.


                                                17
    The best results were achieved by combining all three strategies. The final configuration
(8.6M_448k_296k) improved Acc1 by 2.6% compared to the intermediate 8.6M_224k_148k set-
ting and by 5.4% compared to the baseline 4.2M_112k_74k model. This fully converged SpecTUS
model represents the highest-performing configuration across all experiments.
    The tracked control evaluations for this experiment can be found in Figure C11, and the
comparison with the rest of the experiment runs is in Table C7.
Supplementary information.
• For a quick, zero-install demonstration, SpecTUS inference (with limited throughput) is exposed
  via REST API at our cluster, accessible with a Binder-ready Jupyter notebook at https://
  github.com/ljocha/spectus-demo.
• Complete source code of SpecTUS is available on GitHub: https://github.com/hejjack/
  SpecTUS.
• The whole process of building the model from scratch or fine-tuning the pretrained model,
  and reproducing the test results of this paper, is implemented in a series of Jupyter notebooks
  included in the repository above.
• Pretrained model and synthetic datasets are published at https://huggingface.co/MS-ML.
• Further tables and figures to support reasoning in the main paper are provided separately.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
of the Czech Republic through the projects e-Infrastruktura CZ (No. LM2023054) and RECE-
TOX Research Infrastructure (No. LM2023069), and European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under grant agreement No. 857560 (CETOCOEN Excellence). This publica-
tion reflects only the author’s view, and the European Commission is not responsible for any use
that may be made of the information it contains. Computational resources were provided by the
e-INFRA CZ project (No. 90254), supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of
the Czech Republic.

References
 [1] Kelly, K. & Bell, S. Evaluation of the reproducibility and repeatability of gcms retention
     indices and mass spectra of novel psychoactive substances. Forensic Chemistry 7, 10–18
     (2018). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2468170917301157.

 [2] Moorthy, A. S., Wallace, W. E., Kearsley, A. J., Tchekhovskoi, D. V. & Stein, S. E. Combining
     Fragment-Ion and Neutral-Loss Matching during Mass Spectral Library Searching: A New
     General Purpose Algorithm Applicable to Illicit Drug Identification. Analytical Chemistry
     89, 13261–13268 (2017). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.7b03320.

 [3] Cooper, B. et al. Hybrid search: a method for identifying metabolites absent from tandem
     mass spectrometry libraries. Analytical Chemistry 91 (2019).

 [4] Wakoli, J. et al. GCMS-ID: a webserver for identifying compounds from gas chromatography
     mass spectrometry experiments. Nucleic Acids Research 52, W381–W389 (2024). URL
     https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae425.

 [5] Bauer, C. A. & Grimme, S. How to compute electron ionization mass spectra from first
     principles. J. Phys. Chem. A 120, 3755–3766 (2016).

 [6] Hecht, H. et al. Quantum chemistry-based prediction of electron ionization mass spectra for
     environmental chemicals. Anal Chem. 96, 13652–13662 (2024).

 [7] Schymanski, E. L., Meringer, M. & Brack, W. Matching structures to mass spectra using
     fragmentation patterns: Are the results as good as they look? Analytical Chemistry 81,
     3608–3617 (2009). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ac802715e.


                                               18
 [8] Advanced Chemistry Development, Inc. (ACD/Labs). ACD/MS Fragmenter. https://www.
     acdlabs.com/products/spectrus-platform/ms-fragmenter/. Accessed: 2025-01-21.

 [9] Wei, J. N., Belanger, D., Adams, R. P. & Sculley, D. Rapid prediction of electron–ionization
     mass spectrometry using neural networks. ACS Cent. Sci. 5, 700––708 (2019). Doi:
     10.1021/acscentsci.9b00085.

[10] Rogers, D. & Hahn, M. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 50, 742–754
     (2010).

[11] Ji, H., Deng, H., Lu, H. & Zhang, Z. Predicting a molecular fingerprint from an electron
     ionization mass spectrum with deep neural networks. Analytical Chemistry 92, 8649–8653
     (2020).

[12] Yang, Q. et al. Ultra-fast and accurate electron ionization mass spectrum matching for
     compound identification with million-scale in-silico library. Nature Communications 14
     (2023).

[13] Zhu, R. L. & Jonas, E.        Rapid approximate subset-based spectra prediction for
     electron ionization-mass spectrometry.  Anal Chem. 95, 2653–2663 (2023).       Doi:
     10.1021/acs.analchem.2c02093.

[14] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G. & Dean, J. Efficient estimation of word representations in
     vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.

[15] Weininger, D. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to method-
     ology and encoding rules. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences 28, 31–36
     (1988). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005.

[16] Shrivastava, A. D. et al. MassGenie: A transformer-based deep learning method for identifying
     small molecules from their mass spectra. Biomolecules 11, 1793 (2021).

[17] Litsa, E. E., Chenthamarakshan, V., Das, P. & Kavraki, L. E. An end-to-end deep learning
     framework for translating mass spectra to de-novo molecules. Communications Chemistry 6,
     132 (2023).

[18] Stravs, M. A., Dührkop, K., Böcker, S. et al. MSNovelist: de novo structure generation
     from mass spectra. Nature Methods 19, 865–870 (2022). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
     s41592-022-01486-3.

[19] Dührkop, K., Fleischauer, M., Ludwig, M. et al. SIRIUS 4: a rapid tool for turning tandem
     mass spectra into metabolite structure information. Nature Methods 16, 299–302 (2019).
     URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0344-8.

[20] Butler, T. et al. MS2Mol: A transformer model for illuminating dark chemical space from
     mass spectra. ChemRxiv (2023). Preprint.

[21] Elser, D., Huber, F. & Gaquerel, E. Mass2SMILES: deep learning based fast prediction
     of structures and functional groups directly from high-resolution MS/MS spectra. bioRxiv
     (2023). URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259834060.

[22] Moorthy, A. S., Kearsley, A. J., Mallard, W. G., Wallace, W. E. & Stein, S. E. Inferring the
     nominal molecular mass of an analyte from its electron ionization mass spectrum. Analytical
     Chemistry 95, 13132–13139 (2023). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.3c01815.




                                               19
[23] Liu, Y. et al. Multilingual denoising pre-training for neural machine translation. Transactions
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8, 726–742 (2020). URL https://doi.org/
     10.1162/tacl_a_00343.

[24] Hufsky, F., Rempt, M., Rasche, F., Pohnert, G. & Böcker, S. De novo analysis of electron
     impact mass spectra using fragmentation trees. Analytica Chimica Acta 739, 67–76 (2012).
     URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0003267012008884.

[25] Wakoli, J. et al. Gcms-id: a webserver for identifying compounds from gas chromatography
     mass spectrometry experiments. Nucleic Acids Research 52, W381–W389 (2024). URL
     https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae425.

[26] Reymond, J.-L. & Awale, M. Exploring chemical space for drug discovery using the chemical
     universe database. ACS Chemical Neuroscience 3, 649–657 (2012). URL https://doi.org/10.
     1021/cn3000422.

[27] Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information process-
     ing systems 30 (2017). URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/
     3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.

[28] CONNEAU, A. & Lample, G. Wallach, H. et al. (eds) Cross-lingual language model pretrain-
     ing. (eds Wallach, H. et al.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 32
     (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019). URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
     2019/file/c04c19c2c2474dbf5f7ac4372c5b9af1-Paper.pdf.

[29] Krenn, M., Häse, F., Nigam, A., Friederich, P. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Self-referencing embedded
     strings (selfies): A 100% robust molecular string representation. Machine Learning: Science
     and Technology 1, 045024 (2020). URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/aba947.

[30] Sennrich, R., Haddow, B. & Birch, A. Erk, K. & Smith, N. A. (eds) Neural machine translation
     of rare words with subword units. (eds Erk, K. & Smith, N. A.) Proceedings of the 54th
     Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
     1715–1725 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, 2016). URL https:
     //aclanthology.org/P16-1162/.

[31] Radford, A. & Narasimhan, K. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training
     (2018). URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49313245.

[32] Radford, A. et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners (2019). URL https:
     //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:160025533. OpenAI Technical Report.




                                                20
Supplementary Information A                          Results
A.1   Baseline results

                                  NIST     SWGDRUG         Cayman      MONA
                        HSS50     45.0%    55.2%           58.2%       22.2%
                        HSS10     35.5%    47.1%           50.3%       16.0%
                        HSS1      18.8%    21.0%           23.9%       5.9%
                        SSS50     29.4%    29.3%           26.4%       16.1%
                        SSS10     23.2%    23.2%           23.5%       11.7%
                        SSS1      12.5%    9.5%            9.4%        5.2%
                      Table A1 Percentage of cases where database search
                      methods (SSS and HSS) successfully retrieved the
                      closest structure from the reference database among the
                      top-1, top-10, and top-50 suggested candidates.
                      Performance is evaluated across all test sets: NIST test
                      split, SWGDRUG, Cayman, and MONA.




A.2   SpecTUS results

                            NIST          SWGDRUG             Cayman           MONA
                        Simk   Acck      Simk Acck         Simk   Acck      Simk  Acck
          BDC           0.72    0.0%     0.68     0.0%      0.68    0.0%      0.70 0.0%
          HSS50         0.62    0.0%     0.61     0.0%      0.61    0.0%      0.47 0.0%
          HSS10         0.57    0.0%     0.58     0.0%      0.57    0.0%      0.42 0.0%
          HSS1          0.45    0.0%     0.46     0.0%      0.46    0.0%      0.27 0.0%
          SSS50         0.55    0.0%     0.50     0.0%      0.47    0.0%      0.44 0.0%
          SSS10         0.50    0.0%     0.46     0.0%      0.43    0.0%      0.38 0.0%
          SSS1          0.39    0.0%     0.34     0.0%      0.34    0.0%      0.26 0.0%
          SpecTUS50     0.84    69.8%    0.86     64.6%     0.78    45.2%     0.58 37.2%
          SpecTUS10     0.81    65.0%    0.82     58.5%     0.74    38.8%     0.54 34.0%
          SpecTUS1      0.67    43.3%    0.69     35.0%     0.60    20.7%     0.41 20.8%
         Table A2 Comparison of Simk and Acck metrics between the final SpecTUS model
         and database search methods across all testing datasets (NIST test, SWGDRUG,
         Cayman, MONA).




                                BDC             HSS              SSS
                  SpecTUS1      46.8% / 50.8%   76.4% / 83.6%    79.6% / 88.1%
                  SpecTUS10     69.9% / 72.2%   84.4% / 87.3%    87.8% / 91.2%
                  SpecTUS50     75.8% / 77.9%   85.6% / 88.0%    88.9% / 91.9%
                Table A3 Win Rate / At-least-as-good Rate of SpecTUS over
                database search methods on the NIST test set. For all values, the
                compared performance involves the same number of candidates, e.g.,
                ALAG(SpecTUS10 , HSS10 ).




                                                21
                 BDC            HSS               SSS
  SpecTUS1       44.8% / 49.5%  72.3% / 81.2%     87.7% / 90.2%
  SpecTUS10      70.2% / 73.7%  81.3% / 84.9%     88.9% / 92.3%
  SpecTUS50      77.5% / 80.7%  85.3% / 88.0%     90.9% / 93.1%
Table A4 Win Rate / At-least-as-good Rate of SpecTUS over
database search methods on the SWGDRUG dataset. For all
values, the compared performance involves the same number of
candidates, e.g., ALAG(SpecTUS10 , HSS10 ).




                BDC             HSS              SSS
  SpecTUS1      31.3% / 35.0%   63.1% / 67.4%    77.0% / 81.7%
  SpecTUS10     56.3% / 60.3%   71.0% / 74.2%    82.7% / 84.6%
  SpecTUS50     64.2% / 68.7%   74.2% / 77.2%    84.2% / 86.4%
Table A5 Win Rate / At-least-as-good Rate of SpecTUS over
database search methods on the Cayman library. For all values, the
compared performance involves the same number of candidates, e.g.,
ALAG(SpecTUS10 , HSS10 ).




                BDC             HSS              SSS
  SpecTUS1      21.3% / 23.4%   65.0% / 70.6%    65.5% / 72.4%
  SpecTUS10     35.6% / 37.4%   63.7% / 66.8%    66.8% / 70.4%
  SpecTUS50     39.6% / 41.6%   61.6% / 64.9%    64.2% / 68.0%
Table A6 Win Rate / At-least-as-good Rate of SpecTUS over
database search methods on the MONA library. For all values, the
compared performance involves the same number of candidates, e.g.,
ALAG(SpecTUS10 , HSS10 ).




                               22
Supplementary Information B                                 Methods




Fig. B1 Frequency plots of the three data filtering criteria, measured on the NIST train set.




                                                       23
Supplementary Information C                                Experiments

                                                                        Acc1     Acc10    Sim1    Sim10
     exp5: 8.6M_448k+296k (SpecTUS)                                     43.3%    64.8%    0.67    0.81
     exp5: 8.6M_224k+148k                                               40.7%    62.8%    0.65    0.80
     exp5: 4.2M_224k_148k                                               39.8%    61.8%    0.64    0.79
     exp5: 4.2M_224k_74k                                                39.1%    61.8%    0.64    0.79
     exp4: one src token                                                38.1%    61.4%    0.63    0.79
     exp3: RASSP:NEIMS / exp5: 4.2M_112k_74k                            37.9%    60.7%    0.63    0.78
     exp3: RASSP:NEIMS:NIST                                             37.6%    60.6%    0.62    0.78
     exp3: NEIMS-only                                                   36.8%    59.7%    0.62    0.77
     exp3: RASSP-only                                                   34.8%    57.6%    0.61    0.76
     exp1: log30bins / exp2: mf10M (char-level) / exp3: no pretraining  28.1%    50.7%    0.56    0.72
     exp1: log40bins                                                    27.6%    49.7%    0.55    0.72
     exp1: lin4dec                                                      27.4%    49.9%    0.55    0.72
     exp1: lin3dec                                                      27.3%    49.8%    0.55    0.72
     exp1: log21bins                                                    27.2%    49.6%    0.55    0.72
     exp1: log10bins                                                    24.7%    47.0%    0.54    0.70
     exp2: mf10K                                                        24.5%    46.4%    0.54    0.70
     exp2: mf100                                                        24.5%    47.2%    0.55    0.71
     exp2 mf10                                                          24.0%    46.1%    0.54    0.70
     exp1: lin2dec                                                      24.0%    46.1%    0.53    0.69
     exp2: SELFIES                                                      22.3%    41.1%    0.49    0.65
    Table C7 Summary of all experiments conducted during the development of the final SpecTUS model.
    The metrics were evaluated on the NIST validation set. The experiments are ordered by Acc1 values,
    which served as the primary criterion for assessing the results.




C.1     Experiment 1: Intensity binning




Fig. C2 Bin frequency plot after logarithmic binning with a log base of 2.2 and a shift of 9, producing 10 bins.
The distribution is calculated on our train split of the NIST dataset.




                                                      24
Fig. C3 Bin frequency plot after logarithmic binning with a log base of 1.43 and a shift of 20, producing 21 bins.
The distribution is calculated on our train split of the NIST dataset.




Fig. C4 Bin frequency plot after logarithmic binning with a log base of 1.28 and a shift of 29, producing 30 bins.
The distribution is calculated on our train split of the NIST dataset.




Fig. C5 Bin frequency plot after logarithmic binning with a log base of 1.2 and a shift of 39, producing 40 bins.
The distribution is calculated on our train split of the NIST dataset.


                                                       25
Fig. C6 Tracked control evaluations of the intensity binning experiment. Displays the dependency of Acc1 on
global step measured on the full NIST validation set. The table shows the final Acc1 values.




                                                    26
C.2     Experiment 2: Molecular Representations and Tokenization




Fig. C7 Dependence of the number of learned tokens on the minimal frequency parameter. The highlighted points
denote the tokenizers that we selected for examination. The x-axis is in logarithmic scale.




Fig. C8 Tracked control evaluations of the tokenization experiment. Displays the dependency of Acc1 on global
step measured on the full NIST validation set. The table shows the final Acc1 values.




                                                     27
C.3     Experiment 3: Pretraining dataset mixing




Fig. C9 Tracked control evaluations of the pretraining dataset mixing experiment. Displays the dependency
of Acc1 on global step measured on the full NIST validation set. The table shows the final Acc1 values.




                                                   28
C.4     Experiment 4: Source indication




Fig. C10 Tracked control evaluations of the source indication experiment. Displays the dependency of Acc1 on
global step measured on the full NIST validation set. The table shows the final Acc1 values.




                                                    29
C.5     Experiment 5: Training length and dataset size




Fig. C11 Tracked control evaluations of the training length and dataset size experiment. Displays the depen-
dency of Acc1 on global step measured on the full NIST validation set. The table shows the final Acc1 values.




                                                     30
